Information Technology and Libraries at 50:  
The 1980s in Review  Mark Dehmlow  
 
INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY AND LIBRARIES | SEPTEMBER  2018  8 
 
 
Mark Dehmlow  (mdehmlow@nd.edu ) is Director, Library Information Technology  at the 
Hesburgh Libraries, University  of Notre Dame .  
My view of library technology in the 1980s through the lens of Journal of Library Automation 
(JOLA)  and its successor Information Technology and Libraries  (ITAL)  is a bit skewed by my age. I 
am a Gen -Xer and much of my professional perspective has been shaped by the last two decades in 
libraries. While I am cognizant of our technical past, my perspective is very much grounded in the 
technical present. In a way, I think that context made my experience reviewing the 1980s in JOLA  
and ITAL  all the more fun.  
The most pronounced event for the journal during the 1980s was the transition from the Journal 
of Library Automation  to Information Technology and Libraries  betwee n 1981 to 1982. The 
rationale for this change is perhaps best captured through the context set in the guest editorial  
“Old Wine in New Bottles?” by Kenney in the first issue of ITAL : “Proliferating technologies, the 
trend toward integration of some of thes e technologies into new systems, and rapidly increasing 
adoption of technology -base d systems of all types in libraries .…”1 The article grounds us in the 
anxieties and challenges of the decade  surrounding an accelerating change in technology . Libraries 
wer e evolving from implementing systems of “automation,” a term that focuses more on 
processes, to broadening their view to “information technology,” which is more of a discipline — 
an ecosystem made up of technology, process, systems, standards, policies, et c. In a way, the 
article acknowledges the departure of libraries from their adolescent technological pasts to their 
young adult present for which the 80s would be the background.  
Perhaps no other event is more technologically significant during the decade than the 
standardization of the internet. While the concept of networks and a network of networks, e.g. the 
internet, was conceptualized in the 1960s, it was the development of the TCP/IP network protocol 
that is the most consequential event because it mad e it possible to interconnect computer systems 
using a common means of communication . While the internet wouldn’t become ubiquitously 
popularized until the early 1990s with the emergence of the world wide web, the internet was 
active and alive well before that and, in its early state, was critical  to the emergence and evolution 
of library technologies. From the first issue through the last of the 1980s, ITAL  reference s the term 
“online” frequently. The “online” of the 80s however was largely text based, whe re systems were 
interconnected using lightweight terminal s to navigate browse and search systems. It was not 
unlike a massive “choose your own adventure book,” skipping from menu to menu to find what 
you were looking for.  
Throughout my review, I was happy to see a small, but significant, percentage of international 
articles that focused on character sets, automation, and collection comparisons in countries like 
Kuwait, Australia, China, and Israel. Diversity is a cornerstone for LITA and ALA and the journal  
has continued this trend to encourage the submission of articles from outside of the U.S . The 
1980s volumes of ITAL  traversed a plethora of topics ranging from measuring system  
THE 1980S IN R EVIEW  | DEHMLOW  9 
https://doi.org/10.6017/ital.v37i 3.10749 
performance (efficiency was important during a time when computing was relativ ely slow and 
expensive) to how to use library systems to provide data that can be used to make business 
decisions. Over the decade, there was a significant focus on library organizations coming to terms 
with new technology , e.g. the automation of circulati on, acquisitions, and the MARC bibliographic 
record. There were several articles that discussed the complications, costs, and best practices for 
converting card -catalog metadata to electronic records and several other articles that detailed 
large barcoding  projects. The largest number of articles on a single topic focused on the 
automation and management of authority control in automated library systems. There were 
articles on the emergence of research databases often delivered as applications on CD-ROMs  
which would then be  installed on microcomputers. The term “microcomputer” was frequently 
used because the  80s saw the  emergence of the personal computer in the work environment, a 
transformative step in enabling staff and patrons alike to access online libra ry services and 
applications to support their research and work. Electronic mail was in its infancy and became a 
novel way to share information with end users across a campus. Several articles focused on the 
physical design of search terminals and optimizi ng the ergonomics of computers. There were also 
many articles about designing the best OPAC interface for users, ranging from how to present 
bibliographic records to users , to what information should be sent to printers, to early efforts to 
extend local ca talogs with article -based metadata.  
Many of these topics have parallels today. Instead of only analyzing statistical usage data we can 
pull from our systems, libraries are striving to develop predictive analytics, leveraging big -data 
from across an assortm ent of institutions. I found the 1988 article “Investigating Computer 
Anxiety in an Academic Library,” which examines staff resistance to technology and change to be 
as apropos today as it was then.2 CD-ROMs  have gone the way of the feathered and overly ha ir-
sprayed coifs of the 80s and have largely been superseded by hard drives and solid state flash 
media that can hold significantly more data and can transfer data more rapidly . The current 
decade of the 2010s has been dedicated to providing the optimal search experience for our end 
users as we have broadened our efforts to the discovery of all scholarly information, not just what 
is held in our collections. And of course, inste ad of adding a few article abstracting  resources to 
our catalogs in an innovative, but difficult to sustain manner, the commercial sector has created 
web -scale mega -indexes that are integrated with our catalogs and offer the promise of searching a 
predomin ant amount of the scholarly record.  
There was a really interesting thread of articles over the decade that traced the evolution of the 
ILS in libraries. There were articles about how to develop automation systems for libraries, the 
various functions that c ould be automated — cataloging, circulation, acquisitions, etc. — and 
evaluation projects for commercial systems. If the 2000s was the era of consolidation, the early 
1980s could easily represent the era of proliferation. The decade nicely traces the first  two 
generations of library systems , starting with  university -developed automation and database 
back ed systems and the migration of many of those systems to vendors . The Northwestern 
University -based NOTIS system was referenced a lot and there were some me ntions of OCLC’s 
acquisition and distribution of the LS/2000 system. This part of our automation history is a 
palpable reminder that libraries have been innovative leaders in technology  for decades, often 
developing systems ahead of the commercial industry  in an effort to meet our evolving service 
portfolios. This early strategy for libraries mirrors recent developments of institutional 
repositories, Current Research Information Systems ( CRISs ), and faculty profiling systems like 
VIVO that were developed be fore the commercial sector saw the feasibility of commercialization .  
INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY AND LIBRARIES | S EPTEMBER 2018  10 
 
The cycle of selecting and implementing a new integrated library system is something that m any 
organizations are faced with again .  The only difference is that the commercial sector has e ntered 
into the development of the 4th or 5th generation of integrated library systems, many of which are 
coming with data services integrated and most of them are implemented in the cloud . 
In addition to seeing our technically rudimentary past, there were  several articles over the decade 
that discussed especially innovative ideas or that anticipated future technolog ies. A 1983 article 
by Tamas Doszkocs which was written long before  the emergence of  Google is an early revelation 
that regular patrons struggl e to use expert systems that require normalized and Boolean  
searching strategies. Not surprising is the conclusion that users lean organically toward natural 
language searching , but even then we were having the expert experience vs. intuitive experience 
debate in the profession : “The development of alternative interfaces, specifically designed to 
facilitate direct end user interaction in information retrieval systems, is a relatively new 
phenomenon .”3 The 1984 article , “Packet Radio for Library Automation,”  is about eliminating the 
challenges of retrofitting buildings with cabling to connect LAN network s by using radio based 
interfaces.4 Could this be  an early precursor to WiFi ? There is the 1985 article titled 
“Microcomputer Based Faculty -Profile” about usi ng a local database management application on a 
PC to create an index of faculty publications and university publishing trends.5 This is nearly three 
decades before the popularization of the CRIS and faculty profile system . In 1986 , there is an 
article “Integrating Subject Pathfinders into a GEAC ILS: A MARC -Formatted Record Approach,” an 
article that made me think about how library websites are structured, and the current trend of 
developing online research guides and making them discoverable  in our websites as a research 
support tool.6 And finally, I was struck by the innovative approach in 1987’s  “Remote Interactive 
Online Support,” wherein the authors wrote about using hardware to make simultaneous shell 
connections to a search interface s o they could give live search guidance to researchers remotely.7 
We take remote technical support for granted now, but in the late 80s, this required several 
complicated steps to achieve.  
The 80s were an exciting time for technology development and a decad e that is rife with technical 
evolution. I think this quote from the article “1981 and Beyond: Visions and Decisions ” by Fasana 
in the Journal of Library Automation  best elucidates the deep connection between the past and the 
future, “Library managers are currently confronted with a dynamic environment in which they are 
attempting simultaneously to plan library services and system s for the future, and to control the 
rate and direction of change.”8 This still holds true . Library managers are still planning s ervices in 
a rapidly changing environment, except, I like to think we have learned to live with change that we 
cannot control the rate nor direction of.  
 
1 B. Kenney, “Guest Editorial: Old Wine in New Bottles?,” Information Technology and Libraries , 1 
no. 1 (March 1982), p. 3.  
2 MaryEllen Sievert, Rosie L. Albritton, Paula Roper, and Nina Clayton , “Investigating Computer 
Anxiety in an Academic Library ,” Information Technology and Libraries 7 no. 3 (September 
1988), pp. 243 -252.  
   
THE 1980S IN R EVIEW  | DEHMLOW  11 
https://doi.org/10.6017/ital.v37i 3.10749 
 
3 Tamas E. Doszkocs, “ CITE NLM: Natural -Language Searching in an Online Catalog ,” Information 
Technology and Libraries  2 no. 4 (December 1983), p. 364 . 
4 Edwin B. Brownrigg, Clifford A. Lynch, and Rebecca Pepper , “Packet Radio for Library 
Automation ,” Information Technology and Libr aries  3 no. 3 (September 1984 ), pp. 229 -244.  
5 Vladimir T.  Borovansky  and George S.  Machovec , “Microcomputer Based Faculty -Profile ,” 
Information Technology and Libraries  4 no. 4 (December 1985 ), pp. 300 -305.  
6 William E.  Jarvis  and Victoria E.  Dow, “ Integrating Subject Pathfinders into a GEAC ILS: A MARC -
Formatted Record Approach ,” Information Technology and Libraries  5 no. 3 (September 1986) , 
pp. 213 -227.  
7 S. F. Rossouw  and C. van Rooyen , “Remote Interactive Online Support ,” Information Techn ology 
and Libraries  6 no. 4 (December 1987) , pp. 311 -313.  
8 Paul J. Fasana, “ 1981 and Beyond: Visions and Decisions ,” Journal of Library Automation  13 no. 2 
(June 1980) , p. 96. 