All Tomorrows
A Billion Year Chronicle of the Myriad Species an d Varying Fortunes of Man
Nemo Ramjet
12To Mars
After millennia of earthbound foreplay, Mankind’s achievements on a noteworthy
level began with its political unification and the gradual  colonization of Mars. While the
technology to colonize this world had existed for some time, political bickering, shifting
agendas and the sheer inertia of comfortable,  terrestrial usurping had made this step
seem more distant than it actually was.
Only when the risks clearly began to present themselves, only when Earth’s
environment  began to buckle under the strain of twelve billion industrialized souls, did
Mankind finally take up the momentous task.
All through the decades, traveling to, and later settling on Mars had been
envisioned as quick , relatively easy affairs; complicated but feasible and manag eable in
short term. As the push finally came to a shove, it was realized that this was not the
case.
It had to go step by step. Atmospheric bombardment by genetically-tailored
microbes slowly generated a breathable  atmosphere in a cycle that took centuries. Later,
a few cometary fragme nts were knocked off-course to bring forth seas, oceans; water.
When the wait was finally over, remnant s of Earth’s flora and fauna were introduced as
specially-modified Martian remakes.
When everything was ready, people came from their crowded world. They came in
one-way ships;  fusion rockets and atmospheric gliders, packed to the brim with colonis ts,
sleepi ng in dreams of a new beginning. 
The first steps on Mars were taken not by astronaut s, but by barefoot children on
synthetic grass.
3A lander ferries the first people to the pre-terraformed eden of Mars.
4The Martian Americans
For several hundred years Mars remained as a backwater; prospering but still dim
compared to the splendor  of Earth, which  was glowin g brighter  than ever before. Thanks
to the relocat ion of environmenta lly demand ing industries  to Mars, Earth could usurp
everything, without having to damag e its tired biosph ere. This was the Terrestrial
Heyday; the climax of economic, cultural and social development on old Earth.
This, however, was not to last. Like the gradual separation of America from her
Colonial mother, the governments of Mars adopted a new, Martian identity. They became
the Martian Americans.
The difference between Earth and the Mars was not only political. A few
generations in the lighter gravity gave the new Americans a spindly, lithe frame that
would look surreal in their old home. This, combined with a certain amount  of genetic
enginee ring, took the Martians’ separation to a new level.
For a while the silent schism between the two planets  was mutually accepted, and
the balance  of power hung in an edgy equilibrium. But the Terra-Martian standoff did not,
could not last forever. With limitless resources and an energetic population, Mars was
bound to take the lead.
56Civil War
The Martian turnover was expected to occur in two ways; either th rough long- term
economical gains or by a much shorter but painful armed conflict. For almost  two
hundred years, the former method seemed to take effect, but this gradual stretch
eventually did break in a most destructive  way.
Almost  since  its establishment, Martian culture was suffused with an explicit
theme of rebellion against Earth. Songs, motion pictures and daily publications repeated
these notions again and again until they became internalized. Earth was the old, ossified
home that held humanit y back, while Mars was new; dynamic, active and invent ive. Mars
was the future.
This ideology eventually reached its semi-paranoid, revolutionary apex. Roughly a
thousand years from now, the nations of Mars banned all non-essential trade and travel
with Earth.
For Earth, it was a death sentence. Without the resources and industries of Mars,
the Terrestrial Heyday would quickly devolve into a pale shadow of its former glory. Since
a trade of essential goods continued, nobody would starve. But for every citizen of Earth,
the Martian boycott meant the loss of up to three fourths of their yearly income.
Earth had no choice but to reclaim its former privileges, by force if necessary.
Centuries after her political unification, Terra geared up for war.
Most thinker s (and fantasists) of previous  times had imagined interplanetary war
as a glorious, fast paced spectacle of massive spaceships,  one-man fighters and last-
minute heroics. No fantasy could have been further from the truth. War between planets
was a slow, nerve-wracking series of precisely  timed decisions that spelled destruction  on
biblical scales. 
Most of the time the combatant s never saw each other. Most of the time the
combatan ts were not there at all. War became a duel between complicated, autonomous
machines programmed to maximize damage to the other side while trying to last a little
longer .
Such a conflict caused horrendous destruction on both sides. Phobos, one of Mars’
moons, was shattered, and rained  down as meteorite hail. Earth received a polar impact
that killed of one third of its population.
Barely escaping extinct ion, the peoples of Earth and Mars made peace and re-
forged a united solar system. It had cost them more than eight billion souls.
7Star People
The survivors agreed that massive changes were necessary to ensure that such a
war never occurred again. These reforms were so comprehensive that they entailed not
political, economica l but biological changes as well.
One of the greatest differences between the people of the two planets  was that
over time, they had almost become different species. It was believed that the solar
system could never completely unify until this discrepancy was overcome. 
The answer was a new human  subspecies, equally and better adapted not only to
Earth and Mars, but to the conditions of most newly terraformed environm ents as well.
Furthermore, these beings were envisioned with larger brains and heightened talents,
making them greater than the sum of their predecessors. 
Normally, it would be hard to convince any population to make a choice between
mandato ry sterilization and parenting  a newfangled  race of superior beings.  However,
memories of the war were still painfully fresh, and it was easier to implement  these
radical procedures in the wake of such slaughter. Any resistance to the birth of the new
species did not extend beyond meager complaints and trivial strikes.
In only a few generations, the new race began to prove its worth. Organiz ed as a
single state and aided by the technological developments of the war, they rapidly
terraformed and colonized Venus, the Asteroids and the moons of Jupiter and Satur n.
Soon however, even the domain  of Sol grew too small. The new people who
inherit ed it wanted to go further, to new worlds under distant  stars. They were to become
the Star People. 
8 
9Colonization and the Mechanical Oedipi
Even for the Star People, interplanetar y travel was a momentous task. Early minds
had boggled  over the problem and fantasies such as faster than light travel and
hyperspace emerged as the only “solutions”.
Simply put, it was impos sible to take a large number of people with enough
supplies to even the closest star to make colonization feasible. The existing technologies
could only slug along  at mere percentages of lightspeed, making the journey an epoch-
spanning affair. Enormous “generation ships” were conceived  and even built, but these
succumbed to technical difficulties or on-board anarchy after a few cycles.
The solutio n was to first go there, and make the colonists later. To this end, fast
and small, automated ships were sent forth to the stars. On board were semi-sentient
machines programmed to replicate and terraform the destination, and “construct” its
inhabitants from the genetic materials stored on board.
A bizarre  problem plagued  such attempts. The first generation  of humans  to be
manu factured sometimes  develope d a strange affection for the machines that made
them. They rejected their own kind and perished after the massive identity crisis that
followed . This technological Oedipus  complex was not uncommon; nearly half of all the
colony-fo unding  attempts were lost through it.
Even then, however, the remaining half was enough to fill Humanity’ s own spiral
arm of the galax y. 
10The Summer of Man
Right after Mankind’s  coloniz ation of the galaxy came its first true golden  age.
Reared by machine prophets, the survivors of the Oedipal plagues  built civilizations that
equaled and even surpassed their Solar forbears.
This diffusion across the heavens did not mean a loss of unity. Across the skies,
steady flows of electromagn etic communication  linked Mankind’s worlds with such
efficiency that there was no colony that did not know about the goings on of her distant
siblings. The free-flow of information meant, among other things; a vastly accelerated
pace of technological growth. What couldn’t  be figured out in one world was helped  out
by another, and any new development s were quickly made known to all in a realm that
spanned centuries of light.
Not surprisingly, living standards rose to previou sly unimaginable levels. While
this did not exactly mean a galactic utopia, it was safe to say that people of the colonized
galaxy  lived lives in which labor;  both menial and mental, was purely compulsory.
Thanks to the richness of the heavens and the toil of machines, each person had access
to material and cultural wealth greater than that of some nations today.
During all this development, a curious phenomenon was observed. While alien life
was abundant  in the stars, no one had encountered any signs of true intelligence. Some
attributed  this to an overall rarity, while others went as far as divine influence;
resurrecting religion. 
Regardless of the theorizing, one question went truly and utterly unanswered.
What would really happen, if mankind ever ran into his equals or superiors in space?
11Two star people watch a holographic movie as they lounge under the remnants of their
colonized world’s indigenous flora. For them, it is a life of continual bliss.
12An Early Warning
During those times , a small discovery of immens e implications warned humanity
that it might not be alone.
On a newly colonized world, engineers had stumbled across the remains of a
puzzling creature, considered so because it had every hallmark of terrestrial animals on
an alien planet. Justifiably named Panderavis pandora, the colossal fossil belonged  to a
bird-like creature with enormous claws . Later research determined it to be a highly
derived therizinosaur, from a lineage of herbivorous dinos aurs that died out millions of
years ago on Earth. 
While every other large land anima l on that colony world had three limbs, a
copper based skeletal system and hydrostatically operated muscles; Panderavis was a
typical terrestrial vertebrate with calcium-rich bones and four extremities. Finding it there
was as unlikely as finding an alien creature in Earth’s own strata.
For some, it was irrefutab le proof of divine creation. The religious resurgence,
fueled at first by mankin d’s apparent loneliness in the heavens, got even more
intens ified. 
Others saw it differently. Panderavis had shown humans that entities; powerful
enough to visit Earth, take animals from there and adapt  them to an alien world, were at
large in the galaxy. Considering the time gulf of the fossil itself, the mysterious beings
were millennia older than humanity when they were capable of such things.
The warning was clear. There was no telling what would happen if mankind
suddenly ran into this civilization. A benevolent contact was obviously preferred and even
expected, but it paid to be prepared. 
Silently, humani ty once again began to build and stockpile weapons, this time of
the interplanetar y potency. There were terrible devices, capable of nova-ing stars and
wrecking  entire solar systems. Sadly,  even these preparations would prove to be
ineffectual in time.
13A reconstruction of Panderavis shows the creature’s rake like claws, with which it dug
furrows in the soil to find its food. Opportunistic local animals walk alongside Panderavis,
looking for morsels left over from its feasting.
14Qu
The first contact was bound to happen. The galaxy , let alone the Universe was
simply too big for just a singul ar species to develop intelligence in. Any delay  in contact
only meant a heighten ing of the eventual culture shock. In humanity’s case, this “culture
shock” meant the complete extinction of mankind as it had come to be known.
Almost a billion years old, the alien species known as Qu were galact ic nomads,
traveling from one spiral arm to another in epoch-spanning migrations. During their
travels they constantly improved and change d themselves until they became masters of
genetic and nanotechnological manipu lation. With this ability to control the material
world, they assumed a religious, self-imposed mission to “remake the universe as they
saw fit.” Powerful as gods, Qu saw themselves as the divine harbingers of the future. 
This dogma was rooted in what had been a benevolent attempt to protect the race
from its own power. However, blind, unquestioning obedience  had made monsters of the
Qu.
To them humanity,  with all of its relative glories, was nothing  more than a
transmutable subject. Within less than a thousand years, every human  world was
destroyed, depopulated  or even worse; changed. Despite the fervent rearmament, the
colonies could achieve  nothing against its billion-year-old foes, save for a few flashes of
ephemeral resistanc e.
Humanity,  once the ruler of the stars, was now extinct. However, humans were
not.
15Qu triumphant in the fall of Man. To his left floats a nanotechnological drone, to the right,
a genetically modified tracing creature.
16Man Extinguished
The worlds of humanity, gardens of terraformed paradise, seemed strangely
empty to the Qu. Often there were no raw materials available other than people, their
cities and a few basic niches of ecology, populated by genetical ly modified animals and
plants from Earth. This was because humans had erased the original alien ecologies in
the first place.
Offended by another race trying to remake the universe, the Qu set forth to
punish these “infidels” by using them as the building materials of their vision. While this
led to a complete extinguishment  of human sentience, it also saved the species by
preserving its genetic heritage in a myriad of strange new forms.
Populated by ersatz human s, now in every guise from wild animals to pets to
genetically modified tools, Qu reigned  supreme for forty million years on the worlds of
our galaxy.  They erected kilometer-high  monuments  and change d the surfaces of entire
worlds, apparently to whim. 
One day, they departed as they had come. For theirs was a never-ending quest
and they would not, could not stop until they had swept through the entire cosmos.
Behind them the Qu left a thousand worlds, each filled with bizarre creatures and
ecologies that had once been men. Most of them perished right after their caretakers left,
others lasted a little longer  to succumb to long-term instabilities. On a precious  few
words, descendants  of people actually manage d to survive. 
In them lay the fate of the species, now divided and differentiated  beyond
recognition.
17A mile high Qu pyramid towers over the silent world that once housed four billion souls.
Such structures are the hallmark of Qu, and they can be seen on every habitable world
they passed through.
18Worms
Their world lay under a scorching sun, its intens ity made monstrous through the
interventions of the bygone Qu. The surface lay littered with husks of dead cities, baking
endlessly like shattered statues in a derelict oven.
Yet life remained on this unforgiving place. Forests of crystalline “plants ”
blanketed the surface, recycling oxygen for the animal life that teemed und erground. One
such species,  barely longer  than the arms of their ancestors, was the sole surviving
vertebrate. Furthermore, it was that planet’ s last heir of the star people.
Distor ted beyond recognition by genetic modification, they looked for all the word
like pale, overgrown worms. Tiny, feeble feet and hands modified for digging were all
that betrayed their noble heritage.  Aside from these organs, all was simplified for the life
underground. Their eyes were pinpricks, they lacked teeth, external ears and the better
half of their nervous system. 
The lives of these ersatz people did not extend beyond digging aimlessly. If they
encountered food, they devoured it. If they encountered others of their kind,  they
sometimes devoured them too. But mostly they mated and multiplied, and manag ed to
preserve a single shred of their humanity in their genes. In time, it would do them good.
19Two Worm parents with their young.
20Titans
On the endless savannah of a long-extingui shed colonial outpost, enormous beasts
roamed supreme. More than forty meters long by terrestrial measurements, these
behemoths were actually the transmuted offspring of the Star People.
Several features betrayed their human ancestry. They still retained stubby thumbs
on their elephantin e front feet, now useless for any sort of precise manip ulation except
for uprooting trees. They compensated this loss by developing their lower lip into a
muscular, trunk like organ that echoed the elephant s of Earth’s past. 
As bestial as they seemed, the Titans were among the smartest of the reduced
sub-men that remained in the galaxy. Their hulking stance allowed  for a developed brain
and gradually, sentience  re-emerged. With their lip-trunks they fashioned ornate wood
carvings, erected hangar -like dwellings and even began a form of primitive agricu lture.
With settled life came the inevitable flood of language  and literatur e; myths and legends
of the bygone, half-remembered past were told in booming voices across the vast plains. 
It was easy to see that, within a few hundred thousand years, Humanity could
start again with these titanic primitives. Sadly,  as a catastrophic ice-age took over the
Titans’ homeworld the gentle giants disappea red, never to return.
21 
22Predators and Prey
Devolved predators were common among humanity’s feral worlds.  Most of the
time they resembled the vampires, werewolves and goblins of bygone lore; hunting
equally sub-human  prey with a combination of derived weaponry. Some had enormous
heads with large, killing teeth. Others tore their victims apart with talon-like feet. But the
most common kinds bore modified finger s and thumbs, bristling with razor-sharp claws .
The most efficient  of these predators lived on one of mankind’s first off-world
colonies. In addition to paw-like hands with switchblade thumb s they also had gaping,
tooth studded jaws on disprop ortionate  heads with large, sensitive ears. All of these
served to make them the dominant predators on their home planet.
They ran the prairies, stalked  the forests and ranged through the mountains in
pursuit of different people; herbivorous saltator s with bird-like legs. While their prey
lapsed  into complete  animosity, the hunters managed  to keep the spark of intelligence
alive in their evolutionary honing. 
232425Mantelopes
Not all devolved people lapsed into complete bestiality. Some held on to their
minds, while losing all of their physiological advantages to the genetic meddling of the
Qu.
A singu lar species was a prime exemplar. They had been bred as singer s and
memory-retainers, acting much like living recorders during the reign of Qu. When their
masters left they barely survived,  reverting into a quadrupedal stance and occupying a
niche as grazing  herd animals. This change was so abrupt that the newly evolved
Mantelopes endured only due to the forgiving sterility of their artificial biosphere. 
The Mantelopes, equipped with full (if slightly numbed) Human minds and
completely disabled animal bodies, lived agoniz ing lives. They could see and understand
the world around them, but due to their bodies they could do nothing to change  it. For
centuries, mournful herds roamed the plains, singing songs of desperation  and loss.
Entire religions and oral traditions were woven around this crippling racial disability, as
dramatic and detailed as any on bygone Earth.
Fortunately, the selective forces of evolution made their agony a short-lived one.
Simply put, a brain was not advantag eous to develop if it could not be put into good use.
A dim- witted, half minded  Mantelope  grew up faster than a sma rt one, and grazed just a s
efficiently. The Mantelopes ’ animal children  overtook them in less than a hundred
thousand years, and their melancho lic world fell silent for good. Nothing was sacred in
the evolution ary process.  
2627Swimmer s
Perhaps because their life cycle involved an aquatic  larval stage, the Qu had
transmuted a large numb er of their human  subjects into a bewildering array of aquat ic
creatures. Taken care of by specially-bred attendant s, these post-human  water babies
came in every shape and size imaginable. There were limbless, ribbon  like varieties of
eel-people, huge, whale  like behemoths, decorative people who swam by squirting water
out of their hypertrophied  mouths and horrifying multitudes of brainless wallowers that
served as food stock.
All of them were perfectly domesticated . All of them went extinct when their
masters left. All save a few lightly mutat ed, generalized forms. These swimmers still
resembled their human ancestors to a large degree; they had no artificial gills, their
hands were still visible through their front flippers, their feet were splaye d affairs that
functioned like a pair of tail flukes . Recognizably human  eyes peeked through their
blubber y eyelids and they spoke to each other, though not in words and never in sentient
understand ing.
For millennia they swam the oceans of their ecologica lly stunted world, feeding on
divers ifying kinds of fish and crustaceans; survivors of the food stock originally import ed
from Earth. With the interve ntion of the Qu gone, natural selection resumed. The
swimm ers became more streamlined to better catch their fast prey. The prey responded
by getting even faster, or evolving defensive countermeasures such as armor, spikes  or
poison. Their evolution back on track, the swimme rs drifted  further and further away
from their sentient ancestry.  They would wait for a long time indeed  to taste that
blessing again.
2829Lizard  Herders
They were the lucky ones. Instead of unrecognizably distorting them as they had
done to most of their subjects, the Qu had merely erased their sentience and stunted the
developm ent of their brains.
Distant ly resembling their ancient  forebears on Earth, the primitives led feral lives
for an unnatu rally long time. They never regained sentience after the Qu left, despite
having every incent ive to do so. This was partially due to the total absence of predators
on their garden world, resulting in no advantag e for intelligence. Furthermore, the Qu
had made some small but integral changes to their brains, tweaking with the structure of
cerebellum so that certain features associated  with heuristic learning could never emerge
again. Once again,  the reasons for these baffling changes remained  known only to the
Qu. 
The dumb people eventually settled in a symbiosis with some of the other
creatures that inhabited their planet.  They began to instinctively “farm” some of the
large, herbivorous reptiles, ancestors of which were brought from Earth as pets.
Soon the balance of this mutualism began to tip in the reptiles’ favor. The tropical
climate of the planet gave them an inherent  advantag e, and they underwent a
spectacular radiation of different species. They encountered no competition from the only
large mammals  on the planet;  the brain-neutered descendants  of the starfarers. Faced
with a reptilian turnover, the only adaptation  the sub-men could muster was to slip
quietly into bestial oblivion.
30A lizard herder scans the world with blank  eyes as his stock grow stronger and smarter.
The future does not seem to belong to him.
31Temptor
In the Temptors’ case, the remodeling was done with an almost artistic
enthusiasm. How they managed to survive in their bizarre form was not clear;  their
ancestors were used as sessile decoration and through some mirac le of adaptation they
had endured.
No human  would have recognized them as their descendants. The females  were
beaked cones of flesh some two meters tall, rooted in soil like grotesque carnivorous
plants. The males on the other hand, resembled contorted, bipeda l monkeys. Unlike their
mates they were perfectly ambu latory; dozens of them ran around the females’  mounds
like so many imps. Some would gather food, others would clean the females while others
would stand on guard for dange r. Although  their actions looked purposeful, the males
had no will of their own.
In Temptor society , females controlled everything.  Using a combination of vocal
and phermonal signals, they guided the masculine hordes into any number of menial
tasks, while mating with the strongest, the most obedient and the dumb est to produce
even better drones. On certain periods they would also give birth to a few precious
females, who would be carried away by subservient males to root themselves.
It was a terribly efficient hegemony that would certainly give rise to civilization in
a matter of centuries had fate not intervened. As a stray comet obliterated  the Temptors’
mound forests, one of Humanity’s  best chances for re-emergence was cruelly swept
away.
32A male and female Temptor illustrate the sexual discrepancy that is characteristic to their
species. Note the female’s elongated, pit-like  vagina. When mating, the males descend
into it like subway commuters.
33Bone Crusher
Through the deliberate modif ications of Qu and the blind molding of evolution, the
heavens came to be populated with creatures that would put the myths of their ancestors
to shame. 
Their ancestors were pint- sized pets of Qu that were bred for the dazzling colors of
their tooth-d erived beaks. When their masters left, most of these pampered creatures
died, with no one or nothing left to take care of them. 
But some, belonging to the hardiest breeds, survived.  In less than a geological
eyeblink of a few million years, the descendant s of such creatures radiated into the
evolutionary  vacuum of their garden world. One lineage  led to a profusion of human
herbivores. These were preyed upon by a variety of enamel-beaked raptors, each ev olved
to deal with a specific prey. Among these generalized niches were entire assemblages of
specialized animals, resembling anything from ibis-billed swamp sifters to splendorous
forms with bizarre crests that flared out of their toothy beaks.
There were even secondarily sentient  forms, in the shape of the ogre-like bone
crushers. To an observer of today they would indeed  be the stuff of nightmares ; three
meters tall and hairy, sporting vicious thumb claws  and enormous beaks that suited their
scavenging diet. 
Despite their shortcomings , these corpse eating primitives were one of the first
species to attain intelligence, and althou gh primitive, a level of civilization. All of this
proved the fallacy of human prejudice in the posthuman galax y. A creature could feed on
putrefying meat, stink like a grave and express its affection by defecating on others, but
it might  as well be your own grandchild and the last hope of mankind.
In eventuality, however, not even the bone crushers fulfilled this promise.  Their
dependency on carrion for food limited their population severely, and their mediaeva l
civilizations crumbled after a few uneventful millennia. 
3435Colonials
Their world had given the toughest resistan ce against the Qu onslaught. So tough,
in fact, that they had turned back two successive waves of the invaders, only to succumb
to the third.
The Qu, with their twisted sense of justice, wanted to make them pay. Even
extinction would be too light a punishment  for resisting the star gods. The humans of the
rogue world needed a sentence that would remind them of their humiliation for
generations to come.
So they were made into disembodied  cultures of skin and muscle, connected by a
skimpy network of the most basic nerves. They were employed  as living filtering devices,
subsisting on the waste products of Qu civilization like mats of cancer cells. And just to
witnes s and suffer their wretched fate, their eyes, together with their consciousness,
were retained.
For forty million years they suffered; generation after generation were born into
the most miserable of lives while absorbing the pain of all that they were going through.
When the Qu left, they hoped for a quick extinction. But their lowliness had also
made them efficient  survivors. Unchecked by the Qu, the colonials spread across the
planet in quilt-like fields of human  flesh. After an eternity of tortured lives, the human
fields tasted something that could almost be described as hope.
36A section from a Colonial field shows the misery that compromises their entire lives. Note
that these disorganized creatures can reproduce through both asexual and more familiar
methods.
37Flyers
They were not uncommon at all in the domain of Qu. At least a dozen worlds
sported human-d erived flying species of one kind or another. Most resembled the bats or
the pterosaurs of the bygone past, dancing through the aether like angels. (Or demons,
depending on the point of view.) There were a few bizarr e kinds  relied on swollen gas
glands for floatatio n as well.
Sadly,  most of these creatures were already too specialized to be anything but
flyers. They had forsaken their humanit y for the conquest of the sky; they had little
potential for further radiation beyond their limited roles.
The only exception proved out to be a monkey-like species that flew on wing
membranes stretched across the last two fingers. Their advantage was a unique, turbine
like heart, artificially developed during  the regime  of Qu. No other human flyer in the
galaxy  had such an adaptat ion. The starfish shaped organ sat in the middle of their
chests, directly funneling oxygen from the lungs to the bloodstream in a supremely
efficient way. This meant that the Flyers could develop  energy-consuming adaptat ions
such as large brains without  having  to give up their power of flight.
Not that the flyers were going to reclaim their sentience  right away. Instead, they
literally exploded into skies, filling the heavens with anything from bomber-sized sailors
to impossibly fast predators that raced with sound. Their world was pristine and there
were plenty  of niches to play in. Intelligence could wait a little more.
38An ancestral Flyer in her native element. Although ungainl y, these creatures have an
artificial metabolic advantag e that gives them tremendous evolutionary potential.
39Hand Flappers
Some flying posthumans  re-approached sentience  in an entirely different way.
Without  the augm ented metabolisms or the gravitational advantages of their siblings on
distant  planets, they had no choice but to give  up their power of flight in order to develop
further.
The Hand Flapp ers were one such species. Their wings, o nce used for butterfly-like
flutter s in the unearthly gardens of Qu, had shrunken and reverted back into their
manual  condition. Their legs were likewise re-adapt ed, but they bore a splaye d
awkwardness from their perching ancestry.
Only a singul ar, and an almost  sadistically simple flaw held them back from
developing civilization. In the course of their secondary atrophy, the wings  of the Hand
Flapper s had become useless as hands as well. Their flag like appendag es were very
useful in signaling and mating dances, but they couldn’t  hurl missiles, construct shelter
or even manufa cture basic stone tools. All that they could do with their useless hands
was to display each others’ sexual availability, so the Hand Flapp ers did just that;
flashing and dancing their way to oblivion. 
40A Hand Flapp er on the edge of his mating  territory. During their almost comical
exaggeration of sexual display, his kind has begun to lose their edge at adaptation.
Theirs will be a boisterous, ecstatic but ultimately ephemeral existence.
41Blind Folk
When the Qu came they dug in, and dug in deep. Inside several continent- sized
shelters under their besieged world, they waited  for the invaders to pass them by. It was
a futile gamble. The Qu located  the shelter-c aves and remade their inhabitants without
effort.
The shelters became home to an entirely different ecology, a realm of perpetual
darkness, fueled by the trickle of water and nutrients from the world outside. A
surprisingly complex ecology developed  on this scant resource; gigantic pale insects; the
descendants of common household pests, competed with Dali-esque birds and rodents
over fields of overgrown fungi.  Predators were not uncommon; almost  crocodilian fish
patrolled the underground streams and vast blind bats, echolocating  with unnerving
precision, took their toll on the residents of the cave floor. The kilometer-h igh ceilings of
the shelters glowed  in the dark with protean constellations of bioluminescent fungi, and
in some cases, animals. 
People were present here as well, albeit in unfamiliar forms. They were more often
heard than seen, as they tried to find their way in the dark with banshee-like screams.
These albino troglodytes lived in a realm where sound and touch, not sight, was the
gateway of perception. They had developed  long, tactile fingers, enormous whiskers and
mobile ears to live in the dark. Where their eyes should have been, there was nothing but
a patch of haunting, flawlessly smooth skin. Their perfect adaptation to the world of
darkness had erased the most basic feature of human recognition.
As adapted as they were, they were doomed. Before the Blind Folk could develop
any kind of intelligence to crawl out of their geographic al graves, the glacial constriction
of their World’s continental plates snuffed out the shelters one by one.
42A startled Blind father with his year-old daughter. Although he knows better to sit still in
order to confuse sonar-equipped predators, the youngster screams and soils herself in
terror. Their attenuated fingers are hallmarks of a lifetime spent in darkness.
43Lopsiders
The Qu were grotesquely creative in their redesign of the human worlds. One
group of misfortun ate souls they transported to a planet with thirty-six times the amount
of “normal” gravity, and made them over for life in this bizarrely inhospitable realm.
The results of these experiments resembled nightmare sketchings of Bosch, Dali or
Picasso. They looked like cripples squashed between sheets of glass. Three out of their
four limbs had become paddle-like organs for crawling; only one of their arms remained
as spindly tool of manipulation. This singu lar, wizened  limb also doubled as an extra
sensor, like the antennae of an insect.
Their faces were different horrors altogethe r. All pretensions of symmetry; the
hallmark of terrestrial animals from jawles s fish onwards, were completely and utterly
done away with. One bulging eye stared directly upward while the other scanned ahead,
in the direct ion of the creature’s vertically-opening jaws. The ears were likewise
distort ed.
Monstrous as they looked, these ex-men thrived in their heavy-gravity
environment.  Once again  there was the usual explosio n of species into every available
niche, and the Lopsiders consolidated their chances for a renewed sentience.
44A Lopsider feeds some indigenous pets native to his high-gravity world. The
domestication of native fauna  is the Lopsiders’ first step on the long way towards
civilizatio n.
45Striders
While the Lopsiders were redesigned  to live under extreme gravity, another
species had been adapte d for life under the exact opposite conditions; on a Jovian moon
with one fifth of Earth’s gravity.
It was a world of wonders, where even the grass grew almost ten meters tall and
the trees were beyond belief, towering to sizes attained only by the skyscrapers of
antiquity. In these surreal forests lived equally spectacular fauna; the descendan ts of
pets, pests and livestoc k of humans, who in turn had been reduced to animosity as well.
One could see them in the league- tall forests, almost dancing among the trees as
they reared higher  and higher to browse. Their arms, legs, and necks had been stretched
impos sibly thin, great flaps of skin blossomed throughout their bodies to dispen se waste
heat. Sometimes they would even change their color in order to reflect light and keep
cool. Overheating  was a great problem for their grotesquely tall, thin bodies. 
Although  imposing,  these Giacomettian wraiths were over-developed as to be
sickeningly fragile. Even on their gravitationally forgiving world, a fall could shatter their
bones, and slipping down from a branch would prove to be fatal.  Sometimes, on the open
plains, even a strong wind could bring them down like the toppling masts. They survived
entirely due to the merciful conditions of their garden world, which were about to change
drastically.
About two million years after the Qu left their towering works of human  art, a
lineage of fearsome predators evolved from the terrestrial poultry  that had gone feral on
the planet.  Resembling attenuated versions of their dinosaur ancestors, the predators
swept through the garden world like wildfires, extinguishing any species too fragile to
escape, or resist. The peaceful, delicate striders were among the first to go.     
4647Parasites
Humanity had diverged into two separate lineages on their world. On one hand
there were several races of almost Australopithecine cripples, degraded by the Qu for
manag ing to turn back their initial wave of invasion. Yet simple atavism was too light a
punishment  for them. Their twisted relatives, the parasites, made up the second part of
their sentence. 
There were actua lly several kinds of parasitic ex-people , ranging from tortoise-
sized ambulatory vampires  to the more common fist-sized variety that lived attached to
their hosts. There was even a tiny, endoparasitic kind that infested the wombs of their
female victims like ghastly, living abortions. 
All of these evolutionary  tortures were played  out under the careful scrutiny of the
Qu for forty million years. The punishment  was so baroque, so elaborat e that most of the
artificial parasite-host relationships died out when the Qu left. Some sub-m en learnt  to
cleans e their tick-like relatives by drowning, burning  or even eating them. Others, like
the vaginal parasites, died out as their aggressive method of parasitism effectively
sterilized their hosts.
Yet one or two varieties did manag e to cling on to their hosts with abdominal
suckers, muscular,  gripping limbs and sterile, pain-soothing saliva. But their success did
not lie entire ly in the strength of their parasitical advantages. They also learnt  to regulate
their dumb  hosts, not killing them by over-infestat ion and thus ensuring  their own long-
term survival as well. 
In any case, totally single-sided relations were rare in any ecology, natural or
artificial. In millennial cycles, the cousin species’ vicious parasitism began to give way
into something more beneficial for both sides.
48A parasitic person, shown real size. Although their fate seems inhuma ne in every aspect
to an observer of today, their very survival shows that such subjective values are
ineffectual in matters of long-t erm survival.
49Finger Fishers
Their ancestors were trapped on an archipelago world; a planet sprinkled with
many  small continents  and countless islands over interconnected networks of calm,
swallow seas. Like a magnified Aegean, this place  was a terrestrial paradise  in many
respects. Except that after the Qu, no minds were left to enjoy it.
On this vacant biosphere, evolution was quick to begin her blind, unpredictable
dance. Once feral, the descendants  of degenerate humans adapted themselves to every
available niche, no matter how exotic, how outlandish. One group learnt  to pluck  fish
from the lazy shores. Millennia passed and they settled more into their piscatorial
lifestyle. Elongat ed fingers became ambu latory fish-hooks, teeth modified for a
generalized diet became needle-like affairs, lined up neatly in a long, thin muzzle. In less
than a few million years, the Finger  Fishers established themselves as a prominent
lineage. There was scarcely a beach, an island or an estuary that was devoid of their
pale, lanky  forms.
As prolific as they were, the Fishers were still no better than animals. Their
“humanity” would come only after another spasm of outlandish adaptations.   
5051Hedonists
Even the blissful existen ce of the Finger Fishers would have seemed bothersome
to the Hedonists;  for their kind was not evolved, but designed for a life of pleasur e. The
Qu had kept them as pamp ered pets; set loose in a tropical island-world of succulent
fruits, bountiful trees and calm,  lapping lakes full of sweet, bacterial manna.
Furthermore, the Hedonists were left as the only animal life on this place.  They had no
choice but to enjoy it to the fullest.
In normal conditions, any given species would quickly crowd out such an utopian
environment.  But normal conditions had never been the point of the Qu redesign. They
had altere d their subjects so that they could conceive only after mating an enormous
numbe r of potential suitors, continually over a period of decades. While this took care of
the population problem , it also made the species less adaptab le. Without  any point in
sexual competition, natural  selection would progress only at a glacial pace. Fortunately,
their stable micro cosm remained free of environmental  catastrophes even after the Qu
left.
All these changes had also made the Hedonists’ day. Their lives were juxtap osed
routines of browsing, sleeping and mind-blowing sex; troubled neither  by the concerns of
diseas e or pregnancy. Aloof and carefree, they enjoyed the most pleasurable times of all
mankinds, albeit with the intellectua l capabilities of three-year-olds.
It didn’t really matter, though . Who needed to think when having such a nice
time, after all?
52The favorites of the Qu. A female Hedonist lies alone on a beach, contemplating
absolutely nothing. Without any pressure from the world, their days make themselves as
they go along.
53Insectophagi
Nondescript, quaint human  species abounded in the post-Qu galaxy. Hundreds of
them lived out simple, unnoticed lives, never developing to become sentient, never
learning their true heritage  as star-born human beings.  Most of them went extinct, not to
be missed  or even remembered. Those that lingered  on managed  to survive in shady,
quiet niches, never again making any impact  on the celestia l scheme of things.
One such species was the Insectophagi. They had quietly adapted  themselves for
a diet of colonia l insects and small animals; they had faces covered with leather y plates,
claw- like hands  to dig out prey and worm-like tongues to scoop them up.
All in all, they weren’t special in any particular way. But a combination of galactic
invasio ns, coinci dence  and pure luck would later make them the longest -enduring of all
ur-starmen.
The meek would inherit the cosmos, though not just yet. For now, the
Insectophagi  were concerned only with the location of insect colonies, and the onset of
the mating season.
5455Spacers
It must be remembered that the Star People did not succumb entirely to the Qu
invasio ns. While their worlds fell away one by one, some Star People took refuge in the
void of space. One after another, entire communities scrambled into generation ships and
cast themselves off into the darkness, hoping to go unnoticed by the beings  that had
overrun their galaxy. 
Desperate times  made for desperate measures. As the Star Men had observed
during their initial colonization of the galaxy, life in generation ships inevitably lead to
mass insanity and anarchy. This time however, human s had to adapt  themselves -or face
extinction.
Entire asteroid fields were confiscated and hollowed out to make space-ships  of
unseen size. These hollow shells cradled bubbles of precious air and water, but no
artificial gravity of any kind. It was discovedred that a purely ethereal existence would
ease the stress of interstellar exhile, provided that its inhabitants were adapt ed for life
inside such an environment .
Furthermore, people were forced to change  themselves. In an atmospherically
sealed, gravity-free environment, their bones were left free to grow longer, thinner,
spindlier. The circulatory and digestive  systems were pressurized to av oid heart problems
and congestion.  The latter change had another advantag eous side effect; humans could
navigate  through the void with jets of air -expelled from modified anuses.
Such experiment s were numerous, and usually plagued  with failure. Yet they did
succeed in creating  a future. Sealed tight in their moon sized, air filled, weightless
havens, the descendants of the Star People managed to evade the scourge of Qu. 
It was an endless diaspora . Even after the Qu left, they would find themselves too
diverg ent to have anything to do with their ancestral lifestyles. The survivors of the initial
hurdle would never set foot on a planet again. 
56Forty million years from today, Spacers like this individual are the only truly sentient
human beings that survive. They are so comfortable in their weightless refuges that the
fates of their bestial cousins elsewhere do n ot concern them. They are also painfully rare;
their entire populatio n in the Milky Way Galaxy does not exceed a few dozen arks and a
hundred billion souls.
57Ruin Haunters
A particular human species, singled out by its lucky access to the heritage of its
stellar ancestors, would eventually get to play a leading role in the shape of things  to
come.
They had gotten through the Qu invasion  with relatively little degradation; yes,
they had been reduced to the level of apes, but their recovery had been quick.
Apparently, the Qu had not worked as hard at suppressing their intelligence. Nor had
they made a comparable effort to wipe away the material traces of the Star Men. Even
after millions of years, enormous  ruins of the globa l urban spaces littered  the continents
of their world. Thus did the Ruin Haunters earn their names.
With developed  minds and unrestricted access to the wisdom of the ancient  cities,
the exponential pace of their development  was only natural. One by one they decipher ed
and built upon the secrets of the bygone Star People, until they almost  equaled their
galact ic ancestors in wisdom and skill.
All of this developm ent happened in an unnaturally short period of time, and
sometimes the old technologies were not even understood as they were blindly
replicated. Needless to say, such a pace of development  put premature stresses on the
social and political structures of the Ruin Haunters. They barely survived the five
consecutive  world wars that raked their planet,  two of which were thermonu clear
exchanges.
They made it through, their baptism with fire had hardened and awakened them.
The wars united them politically and pushed their technological capabilities even beyond
the level of the Star Men. Co-incidentally, they also developed  a dangerous form of
autochthonous madn ess. The Ruin Haunters had come to believe that they were the sole
descendants and the true heirs of the Star People. And they were ready and willing to do
anything in order to claim their fictitious, bygone Golden Age.
58Only a thousand years after the Qu departure, a Ruin Haunter wand ers among the
shattered remains of a city of the Star People. The dominating  form of an even greater
Qu pyramid can be seen in the background.
59Sentience Reborn
If any sort of periodical arrangement can be brought  to the history of mankind,
the post-Qu era of emerging human animals can be likened  to a series of millennial dark
ages. However, like any “dark age” situat ion, these periods of silence had finite life
spans. One by one, like stars emerging from the fog, new civilizations were born out of
the shattered remnant s of mankind. 
In some rare cases, the recovery was swift and straightforward. In most other
situat ions, it came only after a lengthy  series of adaptive radiati ons, extinctions and
secondary diversifications. Within these lines of descent, there was as much distanc e
between the initial post-human s and their intelligent descendants as between the first
Cretaceous fuzzballs and Homo sapiens.
Sooner or later, human intelligence returned to the cosmos. But except from their
shared ancestry, these new people had nothing in common with “people” of today, or
even each other.
60Extinction
Not all human anima ls made it through. In fact, it must be realized that the
majority of post-Q u humans died out during the eras of transition. Extinction, the utter
and absolute death of an entire family, entire community,  entire species, was rampant  in
the galaxy.
There was nothing cruel or dramatic in all of this. Extinctio n was as common, and
as natural as speciation. Sometimes a species simply failed to adapt to competition, or
the abrupt change of conditions. In other occasions, their numbers dwindled across
imperceptible gulfs of time. This way or the other, human animals faded out.
In all of this death, however, there was new life. As one species vacated a certain
niche, others would soon step in to ta ke its place. Adaptive radiations would follow, filling
in the blanks with myriads of diverse and varied forms. Despite the fallen, the flow of life
would proceed, blazing in constant turnover.
61The fossil of an extinct, aquatic human from a forgotten colony world. Unbeknownst to
the universe, his kind adapted, flourished and died out soon after the Qu retreat. His tale
serves to tell us that all that is alive will inevitabl y perish, and it is the journey, not the
conclusion that matters.
62Snake People (Descendant s of the Worms):
The scorching sun eventually cooled down, and life flooded back to the surface
from her subterranean stronghold. As animals of all kinds  exploded  into the terrestrial
niches that had been left vacant for millennia, so did the descendant s of the worms. On
the surface, they found new opportunities as entire assemblages  of serpentine grazers,
swimm ers, predato rs…
…and people. One form, descended from tree-climbing mamma lian snakes, re-
evolve d the human intelligence that had lain dormant  for so long. They observed,
contemplated and philosophized with novel, spirally coiled brains and handled the world
with a singu lar pelvic  “hand”, borne out from the remnant s of their ancestors’ feet.
They looked nothing at all like their distant human ancestors, but their social
developm ent followed a similar path; several agricultural world empires, followed by
industr ial revolutions, social experiments, world wars, civil wars and globalization. But
then again,  socio-political parallelism in history did not necessarily imply a similar, or
even recognizabl y human world.
Modern cities of the global Snake world were tangles of pipe like “roads”,
branching, three dimensio nal railroads and windowless, hole-like buildings. Though their
knotted architecture differed from region to region, these settlement s generally looked
like kilometer-wide balls of glass, metal, plastic and cloth, wrapped so tightly that a
human  of today would find it impossible to move inside them. Plazas and open areas
were totally absent, as they presented navigational obstacles and areas of insecurity.
Their evolutionary background in the trees had made the Snake People into borderline
agoraphobes. 
None of these, of course, was unusual to the Snakes in any way. Their relatively
“alien” lifesty le was as particular to them as ours is to us. All across their world, the
arterial cities throbbed with people, each with their own joys, sorrows and chores, living
out lives as human as any other intelligent beings ’.
63A Snake person at home, enjoying a book while smoking and “listening” to vibrational
ground-music. Through the open door can be seen the chaotic tangle of the city.
64Killer Folk (Descendant s of the Human Predators)
The carnivores also rebounded into civilization. Their journey involved a series of
change s during which they lost the adaptat ions that had allowed  them to endure as the
top predators of their world. The saber teeth, once used for slashing through sinew  and
trachea, became fragile and thin, useful only as organs of social display. The hook-like
thumb c laws were also reduced, but not deleted. I n their place, the last two digits rotated
perpendicularly to become newfangled graspers. All this gracility, however, did not mean
weakness. Although they were no longer specialized for huntin g, the Killer Folk could still
kill with their bare hands, but only if they really wanted to. What enormous claws  and
teeth could not do, they could easily achieve with bow, arrow, flintlock repeater or gas
rifle. 
Their descent from predators gave the Killer Folk a unique social profile. Almost all
of their religions had rituals allowing for periods of complete ly natural, animalistic hunts
and duels. This necessity of venting these atavistic urges also led to the formation of
religious “hunter nobilities”; privileged warriors who were skilled in the arts of hunting,
war and murder. Entire societies were assembled underneath these ruling classes;
orderly communities that erupted once every year into an orgy of death , sex, and prayer.
For thousands of years nomad ic warriors, together with their vast herds of once-human
livesto ck, chased and battle d each other across a chessboard of continents .
All of this chaos was to be swept apart with the advent of modernity. In a
developm ent comparable to an industr ial revolution, one nation-pack of Killers devised
methods of settled, intens ive factory farming.  Organiz ed state structure, secularis m and
technological leap-frogging were quick to follow. 
Needless to say, such developments polarized the world into bands  of progressive,
develope d “factory herders” and increa singly fanatical “hunting states.” While one side
condemned their old, animal ways, the other side embraced them with blind zealotry.
This was their crisis of modernity; the balkanization of the progressive and conservative
factions on the road to global unity. Fortunately, the Killers manag ed to pull themselves
through, even after drifting dangerously close to globa l conflict at certain points.
65A young male Killer tours one of the myriad ruined fortresses in his country, testimony of
their species’ bloody, protean history. The planet of the Killer Folk is an archaeologists’
paradise. It has more buried dark ages, ruined cultures and fallen kingdoms than any
other world.
66Tool Breeders (Descendants of the Swimmer s)
They used to be simple creatures, descendant s of a battered people that had
taken to the sea. Their remote sapiens ancestors would have given such beings no
chance of a sentient comeback, for they thought  that technological advances were
impos sible in the fluid medium  of the oceans. But the Swimmer s dispro ved such
predictions by founding one of the most advan ced and most outrageously alien cultures
of the entire human lineage.
Fire, the cornerstone of indust rial engineering, was almost impossib le to sustain
and use underwater. But the Breeders simply choose another path when complex
toolmaking proved impracticable. They began to breed their tools and machines for them.
It had started long before the species was even intelligent. In the endless variety
of life in the seas, the Swimmers always adopt ed and controlled the organisms that were
useful in some way. Once domesticated, these creatures were willingly or unintentionally
modified through artificial selectio n and conditioning. The process was slow, but once
underway, its effects were formidable.
A modern city of the Breeders was a sight to behold. Huge, heart-like creatures
pump ed out nutritious fluids to a network of self-repairing, living conduits.  This was their
equivalent of a power grid, and it reached every single one of the Breeders’ huge,
exoskeletal dwellings; “powering”  bioluminescen t lights, flickering cephalopod  skin-
televisions, medicinal sea-squirts  and countless other devices that had been bred from
living creatures. The advances in biology had risen  exponentially, until genetic
enginee ring was completely mastered. Modern Breeders did not even need to use
animals; a simpl e manipulation of cultured  tissues and stem-cells could give solutio ns to
any problem at hand.
The mastery of genetics had conquered many obstacles.  The yawning ocean
depths, as well as the  Planet’s few tiny landmass es were now firmly within the Breeders’
grasp. However, they were not contempt with mere planetar y dreams. New forms and
bizarre creatures were still being developed, in daring attempts to conquer the one realm
that was most hostile to life. 
Sealed in their living ships, the Breeders wished to return to the stars.
67A Breeder huntress on a garden reef. Living  tools are an indispensable part of these  beings’ daily lives; she
manag es to breath e underwater throug h an oxygen-filtering crustacean fitted over her blowhole. She holds amollu sk-derived rifle that shoots out specially-modified fish teeth, and her companion is a brain- augme ntedfish that has been hardwi red to return kills. Building s made  from calcified shells  glitter in the background,
ablaze  with bioluminescence.
68Saurosapients (Livestock of the Lizard Herders)
One of humanity’s eventual inheritors was not even human. They came from the
reptilian stock that had proliferated during the demise  of the Lizard Herders. 
Theirs w as a true case of a world turned upside down. As the hum ans d egenerated
into witless animals, the cold-blooded  reptiles prospered in the tropical climate of their
planet. Millennia passed and they began to produce increa singly smarter forms, one of
which, distant ly resembling featherless versions of the predatory dinosaurs of the past,
actually crossed over the threshold of sentience and built up a series civilizations.
These fledgling cultures were quick to understand the true origin of the monstrous
ruins littering their planet,  ruins that until then had been considered natural aberrations
or timeless memorabilia of gods. Now, however, they saw the interm ingled ruins of the
Qu and the Star People for what they really were. It was through this understanding that
the biologically unrelated Sauros’ took up the cultural identity of humanity.
In their archaeological efforts, the Sauros began to understand that the animals
they used for food and labor were descended from the founders of their very existence.
And somewhere in the stars lurked the forces that malformed them, forces greater than
the Star People, dark forces that might someday return. The human animals served as a
remainder, just as Panderavis had, that if the Saurosapients wanted to assure their
continued existence in the cosmos, they had to be watchful.  
The pressure of such a reality put their cultures under enormous stress. Some
factions turned to made -up religions and remained ignorant under an umbrella of
comforting fantasies. Others acknowledged the threats of the galaxy , but reverted to a
paranoid rhetoric of conservationis m. The galaxy had scared them greatly.  Finally, there
were those who saw the galactic redoubt and acted to face the odds, however great they
might be. Conflicts and even wars were not uncommon between these three factions.
In the end, the centuries-long dispute began to resolve in the progressive factions’
favor. As they expande d their spheres of knowledge,  influence and activity, the
Saurosapients became as “human”  as any other civilization opening up to the galaxy.  
6970Modular People (Descendants of the Colonials)
The blind workings of evolution followed the unlikeliest paths, made use of the
most fleeting opportunities. The very existence of the Modular People was testimony to
this fact. Their ancestors, the Colonia ls, would’ve been seen as hopeless cripples by
almost  any observer; they lacked coherent organs and their existence was limited to
carpeting water shores like mats of algae. But as degenerate as they were, the Colonials
were resilient survivors, able to hold on to life in the harshest of conditions.
As time passed, they began  to organize themselves  in differentiated  colonies
instead  of homogenous mats. In the colonies, each human “cell” could perform a singu lar
function and benefit from the union of others. Thus began the great age of organization,
during which different colonies competed with each other by developing specialized
human-ce lls that would give them an edge in the struggle for life. Some colonies grew
enormous tap-roots that were able to siphon  resources from far away. Others aband oned
roots altogether and began to move themselves on starfish-like foot segments. Some
colonies came up with units equipped  with claws and poisons , taking competition to a
brand-n ew, deadly  level. Others responded to the threat with armor-plating, or watcher-
cells equipped  with enormous eyes.
The eventual winner of this Colonia l arms race was a sentient colony; organiz ed
around hyperspecialized units whose entire purpose was to direct the others. These
colonies spread around the planet as they adapt ed the parts of their rivals to function
within themselves. Thus were the Modular People born.
Living in fully-industrialized megalopoli, they came in an indes cribable variation of
shapes and sizes. Anything from castle-like guardian  forests to diminutive, scuttling
couriers was a member of the Modular whole. They could combine with each other and
split up, or exchange parts as needs presented themselves. The only thing constant in all
of their protean existence was their mental and cultura l unity.
Due to their biological structure, these people had manage d the impossible. They
were actually living in a world of peace and utopian  equality, where everybody wa s happy
to be parts of greater, united wholes.
71A modular colony treats a specialized digester unit with sprays of anti-ulcer medication
produced by the medical drone held in its “hands”. Note the differing segments, each of
them mutated human beings in themselves.
72Pterosapiens  (Descendant s of the Flyers)
The flyers’ supercharged hearts had given them an evolutionary winning hand,
and they diversified to fill up the heavens. It was only a time before the competition in
the skies got too intens e, even for their souped-up metabolisms.
Some lineage s gave up their wings  and returned to the ground, living as differing
sorts of predators, herbivores and even swimm ers. Their aerial adaptatio ns gave the m an
edge on the ground and they produced forms of stupendous size and agility. There were
wonderful beings,  but no sentienc e came out of the terrestrial sky-beasts. Instead,
civilization flowered in the skies. One species, from a line of wading, stork-like predators,
evolve d a brain that was large enough to imagine and act upon the world. Their feet,
already versatile to catch slippery, swamp-dwelling prey, got even more articulate and
assumed the role of hands. As a compensation they lost some of their aerial streamlining,
but what they could not do with their bodies,  they were more than able to make up with
their minds.  
Their power of flight made  the Pterosapiens a globa l folk, before they could invent
nations and borders. With such an inherent ease of travel, ideas and individuals diffused
too fast for social differences to ossify. Acting with a planetary awareness, they farmed
their gigantic, terrestrial relatives, raised  cities of perches and fluting towers, harnessed
the atom and began to gaze up to the stars, without  havin g to compensate (too much)
from the average individual’s welfare, and without dividing up into quarrelsome factions.
As egalitarian as their life seemed, they paid a stunting,  inevitable price. Their
hearts, even in their boosted state, had trouble  supporting their power of flight and
grotesquely large brains at the same time. As a consequence, they had an ephemeral
lifespan.  A Pterosapien was sexually mature at two, middle-aged by sixteen and usually
dead by twenty-three years of our time. This grim cycle caused them to appreciate every
moment of their existen ce dearly, and they pondered upon it with feverish intensity.  A
shelf of scrolls by Pterosapien  philosophers would’ve  been the envy of every human
library. In their cities, life blazed  away with unreal speed, rushing past to meet fleeting
deadlines.
 
As a species, the angelic flyers were victims of heart disease.    
73A Pterosapien poses by the bizarre building s of a seaside resort. At ten days long, this
will be the only holiday in her ephemeral life.
74Asymmetric People (Descendants  of the Lopsiders)
Although  contorted by gravity, the Lopsiders manag ed to regain their sentience ,
and develop a civilization in a short few million years. Squat , pancake-like buildings
spread all over their planet. These constructs looked like squashed bunkers, and they
were never more than a few meters high.  They did not seem like much, but such
structures were entrances to underground homes, schools, hospitals, temples,
universities but also embassies, prisons , asylums,  command  centers and arsenals. They
lived strange lives, but the Lopsiders were human  in all of their virtue s and evils. Thus, it
was only natural  for them to expand outwards and look for new frontiers to colonize.
Fortunately, their solar system harbored other planets , similar to the Lopsider homeworld
in almost all respects, all respects except gravity. But they weren’t willing to let such
trivial details stop them.
Throughout their history, humans had alway s risked changi ng themselves to
preserve their future. It was a risky gamb le, but it had paid off since the days of the
Martian-Americans. But re-engineering the flattened  Lopsider body for a benign gravity
was a monumental task indeed. Suffice it say that the experiments took millennia to
achieve even limited success. After countless attempts, the Asymmetric People were
born, or rather made. Their bodies were changed considerably; what had been shovel-
like toes to slither through the high-gravity dirt had become centipedal  legs, and the
singu lar, grasping hand was elongated to an extreme degree. Their grotesque faces had
been inverted and turned upside-down after reverting from a flounde r-like existence.
Twisted as they were, members of this new race enjoyed tremendous advantag es over
their flattened forefathers.
Their social development  also parallelled that of the bygone Martian-Americans .
Once again there was a golden age, followed  by increasing tensions and interplanetary
war. But unlike the Martians, the Asymmetrics ruthlessly exterminated their parent race
and went on to rule the solar system alone.  On the way, they stumbled across the
remains of the Qu and the Star People and advanced immens ely. Triumphant  on their
own realm, they turned to the heavens for further exploits.
75An Asymmetric nobleman poses nude to reveal his bizarre anatomy. Normally, these
creatures dress up in elaborate garments that resemble heaps of interconnected,
enlarged stockings.
76Symbiotes (Descendants  of the Parasites)
As time passed, the relationships between the parasites and their hosts got
connected to such a degree that it began to involve a co-operation of the individuals.
These were no longer single-sided relationships; in exchange for the hosts’ nutritious
blood,  the parasites offered their heightened  senses as early warning against predators
and other hazards.
A great “arms race” of symbiotic relationships thus commenced. Certain ‘parasites’
offered their hosts larger eyes, others sharper senses of smell, hearing or even additional
defensive weapons in the shape of venomous saliva, malodorant sprays or an extra bite.
The hosts returned the favor with longer running legs, stronger bodies, and specialized,
ergonomic nesting sites rich in blood vessels and covered in insulating fur. Different
complexes of parasite and host species evolved , compatible only amongst themselves.
The development  of such creatures was in a way reminiscent  of the great Modular
colonies, thriving on their own world light-years away. But unlike the Modulars,  the
components of the Symbiot es belonged to different species, instead  of modified
variations of the same basic organism. In eventuality, both relationships led to the same
point: Sentience.
In the secluded  forests of a certain continent,  a new parasitic species developed .
They did not have the ballistic poison sprays, infectious stings or the grossly
hypertrophied arm-claws of their relatives. Instead, these parasites offered a simpler
bargain; an ability to think in return of total submissio n. Initially this relationship was
more like a horse and its rider, but after a few hundred thousand  years the Symbiotes
could manipulate their hosts like puppets through a combinat ion of tactile and olfactory
signa ls.
A few more millennia and these combined beings developed an order not unlike
our own, complete with countries, politics and even war, albeit reduced in the newly
globa lizing world-culture.  In this age technology filled most functions of the hosts, but a
thriving husband ry of these creatures still remained due to tradition and simple
efficiency. An average Symbiot e would begin the day on his busines s host, and move
onto a more comfortable domestic one when he returned home after work. 
And perhaps, on the olfacto ry television, he would smell news of the excavations
of the million-year-old Qu ruins, of the marvelous  discoveries salvaged  from the Star Men
wrecks, or of the enormous radio arrays that rose everywhere to listen to the stars. 
It was a pattern that was being repeated all over.  
77A Symbiote poses on one of his several hosts. In the background can be seen some of
their rural housing, with man-sized doors for the mindless hosts, and the smaller holes
for their intelligent patrons,
78Sail People (Descendants  of the Finger Fishers)
The Finger Fisher s were already among the most divergent of the post-human
races. With harpoon-like digits and almost crocodilian muzzle s, they looked nothing like
their parental stock. But even this form would look conservative to their sentient
descendants. With  many small, scattered islands, isolated  sub-c ontinents and
differentiated  niches, their homeworld was an evolutionary  cauldron  where isolated
members of certain species could, under the right circumstances, evolve into wildly
different forms. This condition was similar to the island-realms of Madagascar,
Galapagos, or Hawaii on old Earth, except that this time, it was on a global scale.
Some descendants of the Fisher s, trapped on lonely islands, grew smaller and
develope d their fishing claws  into graceful wings. Others took directly to the sea and
became the analogue s of whales,  dolphins and mosasaurs. Within this evolutionary
bubbl ing, one particular lineage gave rise to the ancestral Sail People. 
They too elongated  their finger s into wings,  but these were not used for flight.
Instead, they became sails that drove them effortlessly across the oceans. With finger s
turned into sails, they used their mouths and extended tongues to catch their pelagic
prey. These organs eventually assumed the role of the Fishers’ long atrophied, dexterous
hands. The need to better navigate  the endless seas put an inevitable pressure on their
memories, and the Sailors’ brains grew corresponding ly. It was only a matter of time
until one of these navigator s became smart enough to think.
Even when sentient , the Sail People still needed a long time to achieve  any sort of
social stability. Their scattered world made for a tremendous diversity of cultures , which
competed and fought just as resiliently. Across generations,  untold flotillas of tribal
warriors battled each other in epoch-spanning, pointless conflicts. Nomadic warriors and
pirate  societies inevitably came into being, prolong ing the uncontrollable cycle of
violence.
Only when a certain warrior tribe develope d warfare on an indust rial scale, and
the state society needed to supp ort it, and then, only when this notion of modernity gave
rise to an idea of peace did the Sail People finally manag e to unify.  Generations of blood
had stained the oceans for far too long.
79A Sailor goes hunting with his harpoon-wielding companion  in the background. Extremely
violent by nature, these people frequently resort to savage hunting campaign s to quell
their bloodlust in modern life. Notice their tongue-derived ‘hands,’ and the accompan ying
flying creature, actually one of the Sail Peoples’ distant cousins.
80Satyriacs (Descendant s of the Hedonists)
Their pleasur e-drenched existence, locked between their static paradise world and
their inherently slow p ace of evolution, seemed immune to change. Perhaps this was true
for a a million years or so. But on larger scales, complete stasis was a fable.
During a particular era, geologic upheavals  threw up huge masses of land over the
shallow oceans of their world. The Hedonists, until then trapped on a singular island no
bigger than today’s Iceland,  were not late to colonize these new pastures. This was more
of a necessary exodus, since the events that raised the new lands had also thrown up
enormous clouds of ash that smothered the atmosphere and blocked out the sun. Their
innocence finally spoilt, most of the Hedonists died out, unable to adapt. The only
survivors were fast-breeding freaks who had aband oned the reproductive quirks of their
ancestors. It was these forms that colonized the newborn continent and gave rise to a
multitude of species which included the Satyriacs, sentient heirs to the Hedonists.
These beings resembled their ancestors to a great degree, except that they now
sported enormous “tails”; boneless organs of balance woven out of extended pelvic
muscles and fat. Along  this appendag e, their entire bodies were re-oriented  in horizontal,
almost  dinosaurian postures. Although they had aband oned the frantic reproductive
strategies of their ancestors, their social lives still retained a delightful tint of casual
promiscuity.
The Satyriac civilization was quick to establish itself globally, for even with the
additional landm asses, the terrestrial domain  of their world remained  no larger  than
Australia. For a while three and then two land empires competed each other, before
dissolv ing into a myriad smaller nations and finally re-unifying into a coherent world
order. From this point on, the Satyriac world once again became a Valhalla of pleasure,
with festivals, concerts and ritualized orgies punctuating every working week. This time,
however, it could all be savored by true intelligence.
81Satyriac audience goes wild as the performer hits the climax of his song. Such events are
an everyday part of the Satyriac life.
82Bug Facers (Descendant s of the Insectophagi)
Over time, their insect ivorous ancestors came to resemble their prey. Hardened,
leather y face-plates, once used for defense against stings and bites, ossified and became
integrat ed into the jaw structure. Their hands and feet, with reduced numb ers of finger s
and toes, develope d into pince r-like affairs. Even their metabolism reverted partially into
ectothermy in the balmy, lazy climate of their planet.
But it was none of those adaptations  that gave them the edge in survival. Simply
put, a congenital defect allowed them to regain  their sentience. Even after the
smothering by the Qu, the genes of the Star People remained dormant in their cells.
Through pure coincidenc e, one lineage of the Insectophagi developed an atavistic
throwback, resulting in larger brains. Which just happened to be useful in cracking open
insect nests with crude stone tools.
It was easy ride from there on. Although millennia-long in itself, the development
from stone ax to spaceship was an eyeblink in geological time. Like many other species,
the Bug Facers passed through  consecutive cycles as agrarian (in their case hive-
farming) empires, colonial endeavors, indust rialization, massive world wars and finally,
globa lized world-states. But there was one thing that set their development apart from all
other post-human species. 
They faced another alien invas ion.
History does not record much about the invader s, except that unlike the Qu, theirs
was a singu lar effort and it was beaten off in an intense cycle of orbital and terrestrial
wars. Although  vanquished , the invaders did succeed in leaving behind their traces. They
introdu ced their own flora and faun a, which flourished  on the Bug Facer home planet long
after they departed. More importantly , they imbibed the poor Bug Facers with a
pathological inter-species xenophobia, to the point that they were fearful even of their
post-human cousins on other stars. 
Through an ironic twist of fate, their fears would be more than justified, though
not just yet. The Bug Facers still had time.
83A Bug Face celebrity, arguabl y the most beautiful girl on their planet, poses before a
coastal village. In the distance can be seen gasbag-like tree creatures, relics left over
from the mysterious alien invaders.
Asteromorphs (Descendants of the Spacers)
84Initially refugees, the Spacers were quick to master the vastness of interstellar
space. Their isolated  space arks joined together and multiplied to form a giganti c,
interlo cked artifact that was large enough to contain entire worlds. But no planets  lay
inside the Asteromorph capital; only cavernous, gravity- free bubbles  where the
inhabitants could finally develop to their fullest.
Freed from the constraints of weight,  their bodies grew spindly and insectile, with
individual digits extending into multitudes of thin, versatile limbs. Other than these, the
only developed  organs were their derived jet sphincters; which  went on to become the
principal means of locom otion. But above all were their brains, their bulging, swollen
brains.  
With no hindranc e from gravity, the human  brain could grow into unprecedented
sizes. Each generation devised experiments  that produced offspring with greater cranial
capacity, giving rise to beings  who went through their everyday lives thinking in concepts
and structures scarcely comprehensible to people of today. The physiological limitations
of the human  mind had been long since debated. Now, it was established that these
limits were indeed  real, and individuals who could break them would likewise  conquer
new grounds in philosophy, art and science. Everything changed.
Yet some aspects of humanity, such as the basic desire to expand, remained . To
this end the Asteromorphs built great fleets of globular sub-arks and spread their
influence across the heavens, into every stellar cluster and every star system. Within less
than a thousand years, the galaxy  was straddled by a new and far more alien Empire  of
Man.
Strangely enough , its dominion included none of the newly emerging post-human
species, for its masters had complete ly lost interest in planets ; those stunting, gravity-
chained balls of dirt and ice. The newborn arks settled comfortably in the outer rims of
star systems, quietly observing the lives of their struggling relatives.
For the first time in history, there were actual Gods in the myriad human skies.
They were silent and weren’t even noticed for most of the time, but their watchfulness
was ultimately going to pay off.
8586Second Galactic Empire
Over time, the sentient post-humans  began to reach out to the galaxy. They
inevitably stumbled across the ruins of the Star Men, and figured  out their interstellar
ancestry. These discoveries were followed by a realization; that there might be others
like them, unimaginable distances away. Thus, the fledgling civilizations set about to
probing  the skies. 
The contacts, all established by radio communication, were not spread out evenly.
The Empire began little more than a few million years after the Qu left, with the first
dialogue between the earliest Killer Folk and the Satyriacs. A few thousand years later
they were joined by the Tool Breeders, hailing out from the ocean depths through living
radio arrays. 
The second wave of sentient  species joined in during the following ten million
years, as the Modular Whole, Pterosapiens and the fledgling Assymetrics contacted their
celestial cousins. Finally, in the next twenty million years, newly evolving civilizations
such as the Sauros, Snake People, Parasite/Symb iotes and the Sail People successively
contacted the burgeoning Galactic  Empire. The Bug Facers were aware of the whole
process, but due to their xenophobic experience, they only opened up after a staggering
forty million years of silence.
This union was an empire of speech, for actual travel between the stars was too
difficult to be practical. Like the bygone colonies of the Star Men, the posthuman s co-
operated through the unrestricted exchange of information  and experience. Although
covering every aspect of an astonishing variety of cultures, the Empire’s efforts focused
on two main  issues; political unification (though  not homogenizat ion) and galactic
awareness; constant readiness for possible alien invas ions. Everybody had come across
the remains of the mysterious Qu. Nobody wanted a repeat of the same scenario.
When the Second Empire  ran into the Asteromorphs, (who had silently saturated
the galaxy with their own Empire of Man,) they feared the worst. But luckily for them, the
godlike beings  were not interes ted in the Second Empire, nor any of its worlds. The
Asteromorphs were given a wide berth and accepted as they were; incompr ehensible,
omnipotent forces of nature. 
This coordinated effort lasted  for almost eighty million years, during which  its
member species attained previously unimaginable levels of culture,  welfare and
technology. Each species colonized a few dozen worlds of their own; in which  nations,
cultures and individuals lived to the fullest potentials of their existen ce. 
Needless to say, all of this was possible only through constant communication and
a total openness to the Galaxy . Most communities took this for granted and dutifully
participated in the galactic dialogues. But there were others, silent, darkened beings who
refused to join in. Through them would come the ruin of the Empire.   
87Gravital  (Descendan ts of the Ruin Haunters)
After the lesson of the Qu, Second Galactic Empire  kept a constant watch against
alien invasion. Ironically, they neglected to look among themselves. The second great
invasio n of the galax y came not from outside, but from within.
The Ruin Haunters, who were lucky enough to inherit the secrets of the Star Men
and Qu when other species were mere animals, had experienced a tremendous advance
in technological prowess. All in all they were as sophisticated as, if not more, than the
Asteromorphs of the void. But their ascendancy was not a sane one. Recall that most
Ruin Haunters were already  deranged  with a twisted assumption of being the sole
inherit ors of the Star Men. They refused to communicate with their relatives on other
planets, and kept to their own affairs. This neurotic hubris assumed truly dangerous
proportions after the Ruin Haunters modified themselves.
The origin of this modification lay in an earlier catastrophe. The Ruin Haunters’
sun was undergoing  a rapid phase of expansion, and the species, advanced as it was,
could do nothing to stop the process. So the Haunters did the next best thing,  and
change d their bodies.
The infernal conditions of the solar expansion meant that a biological
reconstruction was totally out of the question. Thus, the Haunters replaced  their bodies
with machines; floating spheres of metal that moved and molded their environm ent
through subtle manipulations of gravity fields. In earlier versions the spheres still cradled
the organic brains of the last Haunters. But in successive generations, ways of containing
the mind within quant um computers were devised, and the transformation became
absolute. The Ruin Haunters were replaced by the complete ly mechanical Gravital.
While not even organic,  the Gravital still retained human  dreams, human
ambitions and human delusions of grandeu r. This, combined with mechanical bodies that
allowed them to cross space with ease, made interstellar war a frighten ing possibility.
8889Machine Invasion
It took a long time for the Gravital to prepare. Propulsion systems were perfected
and new bodies  capable  of withstanding the interstellar jumps were devised. But when
they finally decided that the time was nigh, nothing survived th e slaugh ter.
The invasions followed a brutally simple plan. The target worlds’ suns were
blockad ed and their light was trappe d behind specially-constructed, million-mile sails. If
the dying worlds manage d to resist, an asteroid of two finished them off. Enormous
invasio n fleets were built, but it was rarely necessary to deploy them. The Machines had
caught their cousins completely off-guard.
The great dyings,  all of which occurred in a relatively quick, ten-th ousand year
period, stretched the boundaries of genocide  and horror. Almost all of the new human
species; unique beings  who had endured mass extinctions, navigated  evolutio nary knife-
edges and survived to build worlds of their own, vanished without  a trace.
Even the Qu had been loyal to life, they had distorted and subjugated their
victims, but in the end they had allowed them to survive. To the machines however, life
was a luxury. 
Such thorough ruthlessness was not, ironic ally, borne out of any kind of actual
hatred. The Gravital, long accustomed to their mechanica l bodies, simpl y did not
acknowledg e the life of their organic cousins. When this apathy was mixed with their un-
sane claims as the sole heirs of the Star Men, the extinctions were carried out with the
banality of say, an enginee r tearing down an aband oned building. Under the reign of the
Machines, the Galaxy  entered a brand-n ew dark age.
90A rare instance of a direct invasion by the Machin es, on one of the shore cities of the
Killer Folk. Most of the time the inhabitants of the Second Empire were wiped out
globally, without the necessity of such confrontations.
91When Considering the Invasion
The Machine Invasion brought  on the greatest wave of extinctions the galaxy had
ever seen; for it was not a simple act of war by one species against another, but a
systematized destruction of life itself.
When considering such a vast event, it is easy to get lost in romantic delus ions. It
is almost as easy to write  off the Gravital  as ‘evil’ as it is to consider the entire episode as
a nihilistic, ‘end of everything’ kind of scenario. Both of these approaches are, as they
would be in any historical situation, monumenta l fallacies.
To begin with, the Gravital were not evil, at least not to their own perception.
These beings, although  mechanical, still lived their lives as individuals and operated
inside coherent societies. They had surrendered their organic heritage but their minds
were not the cold, calculating engines  of true machines. Even after giving orders that
would destroy a billion souls, a Gravital would have a home to go to, and, as incredibly as
it might sound, a family and a circle  of friends towards which it felt genuine affection.
Despite being  endowed with compassion, their harsh treatment of the organics  was the
result of, as mentioned before, a simple inability to understand their right to live. 
Furthermore, the Gravital did not constitute a singu lar, indivisible whole whose
entire purpose was to wreck the universe. True, their technolog ical advancement had
allowed them to form a pan-galactic entity, but within itself the Machine Empire  was
divided into political factions,  and even religious faiths. Superimpose d over these fault
lines were the daily lives and personal affairs of families and individuals. Like any
sentient being, they had a sense of identity and thus, differing agendas.
Nor did the Machine invasion mean the end of everything. There certainly was a
widesp read destruction of life, but what was lost was ‘only’ organic life. Consuming
energy, directi ng it for reproduction, thought  and even evolution, the machines were as
alive as any carbon-based organism. Despite the turnover, Life of a sort survived, and as
would be seen, even preserved some of its organic  predecessors. 
92Subje cts (Many descendants  of the Bug Facers) 
The Bug Facers; racially shy and xenophobic due to their background of repeated
alien invasion s, became the first species to face the Gravital onslaught. As ironic as their
fate seemed, the Bug Facers were the luckiest of the post-humans. Instead of being
exterminated like the rest of their cousins, they survived as the only organic beings in the
Machine Empire. 
The precise reasons for their retention remain unknown to this day. Perhaps the
Machines hadn’t perfected their ruthless apathy by then. Or perhaps they pitied the poor
organics, and allowed them to maintain a stunted parody of an existence.
Whatever the reason, the Bug Facers endured. But they hardly resembled their
original ancestors anymore. Genetic engineering,  the lost art of the galaxy-threading Qu,
(and later, the Tool Breeders as well,) was mastered almost as comprehensively by the
Machines. Not hesitating to warp the beings which they did not really consider to be
alive, they spliced their way into the Bug Facer DNA, producing generations  of literal
abominations. Would a woman or man of today show any apprehension towards re-
assembling a computer, or even recycling trash? Such was the attitude  of the triumphant
Gravital .
Thus, multitudes of Subje cts were produced, distorted to such an extent that even
the meddling of the Qu seemed comparatively timid. Most of them were used as
servants, caretakers and manual  laborers. These were the lucky forms. Some sub-men
were reduced to the level of cell cultures, useful only for gas exchange and waste
filtering. Others were molded into completely artificial ecologies; baroque simulations
that served only as entertainment.  Some machines, with their still-human ambitions,
took this practice into a new level and produced living works of art; doomed, one-off
creatures who existed purely as biological anachronisms. 
Be it as tool, slave or entertainment,  Humanity  narrowly held on to its biological
heritage,  while its Machine cousins reigned  supreme for an unbelievable fifty million
years. 
93The Bug Facer archetype, flanked by two of his twisted descendants. To his left; a
phallus -bearing polydactyl, bred as a sacrificial offering in one of the many different
Machine religions. To the right; a one-off work of art; designed to play its modified
fingers like a set of drums while ululating the tunes of a certain pop song.
9495The Other Machines
Recall that despite its Galaxy- cradling might, the Machine Empire was not
homogenous. It contained dozens of differing  factions that did not always agree on
everything, including the treatment of their downtrodden, biological Subje cts.
Some Machines, over a process involving several religious, social and philosophical
doctrines, began to comprehend the universality of life, and the common origin of organic
and mechanical human ities. Initially such individuals lived in seclusion or withhe ld their
beliefs from the world. They secretly enginee red lineages of Subje cts that could live,
move and think as freely as they could. In a few memorable instanc es the engineers fell
in love with their creations,  and their martyrdom inspired other Machines to think just a
little differently.
Eventually, the ideology gained enough  momentum to be practiced  openly  in
everyday life. However, the sect of Tolerat ion soon ran into odds with their hardline, pan-
mechanica l rivals. The seething intolerance between the two factions  finally broke when
some Tolerant  Machin es wanted so set several worlds aside for the unrestricted
developm ent of biological life. All hell broke loose and the Machine Empire;  the
appar ently seamless monolith of the galaxy, experienced its first short, bitter civil war.
The war did not cause any lasting damage, but it plainly illuminated one fact. The
greatest entity the galax y had ever seen was not without its problems.
9697The Fall of the Machines (Return of the Spacers)
In the longer run, the internal struggles  of the Machine Empire just might have led
to its downfall. But, there was no need to wait that long, as the Empire died a shorter,
but immens ely more cataclysmic death.
For a long time, the Machine and the Asteromorph Empire s had been eyeing each
other nervously. They hadn’t yet run into open confrontatio ns, as the Asteromorphs kept
mostly to their outer-space arks and the Machine  Empire occupied the planets . In almost
every inhabitable solar system of the galaxy, the same upside-down tension built up
between organic  beings  living in the void, and machines inhabiting perfectly terrestrial
worlds.
Power was evenly balanced  between the two rival Empires. Moreover, this balance
involved fo rces strong enough to destroy planets e n-masse. Each side kn ew that any kind
of war would result in mutua l annih ilation, and only insanity could start such a conflict.
Well, the post-civil war Empire of the Machines did go insane , in a sense. In order
to divert  attention from internal struggle s, it needed a new enemy to consolidate its rival
factions against. How unwise, that this enemy came to be the Asteromorphs.
It is unnecessary and nearly imposs ible to describe the carnage that followed.  The
conflicts lasted  anywhere up to a few million years, and the resulting loss of life (both
mechanica l and organic) made the initial Machine  Genocide seem irrelevant.
When the cosmic dust settled, the winners displayed themselves. The conquerors
were the Asteromorphs, changed beyond recognition after fifty million years of continual
self-perfection. Their grossly hypertrophied brains stretched out like wings  on either side,
and their finger-derived limbs had formed an intricate set of sails and legs. Endowed with
superior technology and limitless patience, these beings almost  completely destroyed the
Machines, despite losing a substantia l numb er of their own species.
The conflict also thrust the Asteromorphs into the affairs of their long-neglected
human  cousins. As impos sible as it seemed, some of the Machines’ Subje cts had survived
the ordeal. Now, the Asteromorphs could no longer look away. 
With the Machines gone, it was up to the Asteromorphs to clean up after them.
They took up the Subjects and used their genetic heritage  to populate entire planets .
During this age of reconstruction , which  lasted for another two million years, many
Asteromorph world-builders emerged as true Gods, creating inhabited worlds almost out
of scratch. Their Subjects, meanw hile, became the inheritors of a truly new, war-torn
Phoenix of a Galax y.
9899The Post-War Galaxy:
When replen ishing lost worlds, the Asteromorph gods also took measures to
ensure the continued safety of their creations. T he abrupt ris e of the Machines had s hown
that unless carefully regulated, the wealth of the stars could always  host a race of pan-
galact ic usurpers. 
The Asteromorphs, watchful but ever transparent, did not want to interfere
direct ly. Instead, they produced terrestrial versions of their own kind to regulate the
galaxy.  They adapt ed their delicate, ethereal fingers into spidery limbs, and shrunk their
brains considerably to re-adjust  to the rigors  of gravity. The resulting sideline was
stunted by Asteromorph standar ds, but still it produced demigods in every sense of the
word. 
These beings, known often as the Terrestrial Spacers or simply the Terrestrials,
nurtured and controlled the development of the post-war civilizations on many planets.
They acted as caretakers, prophets, kings  and emperors, but also as grim reapers as the
occasion dictated. 
The endeavor did not always  proceed as smoothly as planned, of course. Most of
the time the newborn races refused to heed their mentors and in several cases even
rebelled against them. Needless to say, this crime was always punished  with a swift
extinction. Furthermore, even the Terrestrials grew corrupted. Instead of offering
guidance , Terrestrials on many planets simply played  god, weaving contrived religions
around themselves to shamelessly exploit their subjects. It was not ethical or even
productive, but this method seemed to guarantee more stability than actually trying to
bring up the new races. 
This way or another, organic  sentience reclaimed its dominance  in the galaxy. The
New Empire; managed by Terrestrials, populated by a myriad descendants of the
Subje cts, and overseen ultimately by the omniscient Asteromorphs, achieved  greater
progress and a longer-last ing calm in the galax y than all of its predecessors combined.
100A nude Terrestrial shows the highly divergent, yet still bizarrely human anatomy that is
the characteristic of this species. These particular Terrestrials maintain  a religious
hegemony over their clueless subjects; dressing up in elaborate veils and headgea r to
assert their ‘divine’ inheritance.
101The New Machines:
Long after their fall from grace, the Machines still clung  on to existence. During
the initial aftermath of the war, the Asteromorphs had planned to exterminate every last
one of them, only to discover that the Machines  were simply too useful to destroy. For
millions of years they had perfected the interface between mind and machine to such an
extent that they could live and operate in the most inhospitable conditions. Such beings,
deprived of their galax y-straddling power, would make invaluable contributions to
research and exploration  in the New Empire.
There was a sense of poetic justice in all of this. The Machines, who once distort ed
biological life forms to their whim, were finally treated to a similar fate. To begin with,
the Asteromorphs completely scrapped their ability of self-contained gravitational
manipulation; the very force that had rendered them invulnerable in the first place. They
were given  finite life spans and slightly numbed imaginations, so that history would not
repeat itself. The degradatory nature of these changes, however, did not imply an overall
regression. 
Unlike their ancestors, the New Machines were endowed with nanotechnological
bodies that could remodel themselves continuously, which meant that they could come in
every shape and size imaginable, and then some that could not. A machine citizen could
live for some time in the void of the space, conducting research, and then transform into
a completely different body plan for a holiday on a cometary halo, tropical jungle or a
methane ocean. He or she would also make the trip personally by growing temporary
hyperdrives and ramjet engines!  
Despite their breathtaking versatility, the Machines were never as common or
prominent, even after completely accepting their role as lowly citizens of the New Empire.
The greatest wars in conceivable history had ingrained the organics with too deep a
mistrust of their mechanical neighbor s, and the New Machines  were always  treated with  a
degree of discrimination. The sins of their fathers had come to shackle this most
splendo rous of all human species. 
102A machine citizen of the New Empire. She sports a dazzling pair of branching  arms that
suit both the latest fashion trends and her job as an artisan. Machines following fashion
might seem unusual to a reader of this era, but never forget that these beings are human
intelligences, only in different bodies.
103Second Contact:
With successive waves of machine-aided discovery and colonization, the New
Empire grew exponentially. Such was the growth of wealth and progress that its
description would need the use of concepts that remain unexplo red today. To talk with a
man of today about the comings and goings of the New Empire  would be akin to giving
lectur es of 20th century geopolitics to a hunter-gath erer.
This magn ificent entity was not blind to the unive rse around it. It tuned in its
eyes, ears and sensors, and probed the events of the surrounding galaxies. The New
Galactics suspected that the surrounding nebulae might also have their indigenou s folk,
and it was wise to contact them before a misunde rstanding, or conflict could occur. On a
darker side, these observation s also served as looko uts for potential invade rs. Even then,
the memory of the Qu was not forgotten.
The discovery was eventually made. One of the neighboring galax ies was showing
patterns of activity that were the unmistakab le signs  of a sentient organizat ion. Some
thinkers reviled in the discovery of a new civilization, while others feared a return of the
Qu. Fortunately, this second encounter with an alien species proved to be a peaceful one.
Perhaps the intelligences of both galaxies were finally mature enough  to meet without
quarreling. 
The other Galaxy was dominated by connected unions of different beings,  presided
over by various kinds  of Amphicephali; bizarre creatures that resembled giant snakes
with heads on both ends, one of which bore a secondary, retractile body that they would
use to interact with the world. Apparently, they had undergone alternati ng series of
regressions, evolutionary radiations and self-imposed genetic makeovers, just as
human ity had. 
With all of their wild difference, the Amph icepha li were welcome. They were the
first, but surely not the last.
104An Amphicephalus ambassador with spaceships typical of their kind. Her strange body
plan betrays an evolutionary history as complicated as that of humanit y.  
105Earth Rediscovered:
The purpose of this work is not to describe the limitless progress that follow ed the
cross-galact ic contact. One could go indefin itely, chronicling how the united galaxies re-
encountered and subdued the Qu, how they cradled  their suns with artificial shells,
multiplying their  inhab itable zones a billion-fold, how they criss-cr ossed interstellar space
with wormholes and made travel a thing of the past. Ultimately, descendant s of those
beings even conquered Time itself, prolonging the existence of their minds indefinitely via
rejuvenating technologies.
For a time, all men were gods. 
But from (y)our vantag e point, one discovery truly stood out in this orgy of
advance. Compared with gargant uan achieve ments like the taming of space and the
construction of the star-shells, it was a mere blip, a revelation of long-forgotten trivia.
This was the re-discovery of Earth; the birthplace of humanity, where the omnipresent
Asteromorph, the star-gliding Machine, and the millions of humble resident races could
all trace their origins.
It was made quietly, by a singular researcher combing the vestiges of forgotten
history, decade after decade. Millions of years of wars, invasions and extinctions had
buried the evidenc e thoroughly and comprehensively. When she finally came across
irrefutable evidence, nobody was around to celebrate. That would come later.
106By the time of Earth’s rediscovery, humans have diverged considerably from their
ancestral forms.
107Return:
The discovery sparked a certain amount of interest, though  nowhere as much as
other breakthroughs had. To most humans of the cosmos, their ancestral birthplace was
simply an intere sting piece of information, a piece of trivia with which they had lost all
ties.
Still, a ship was sent forth, and it landed  without ceremony, for now there was no
intelligence left on Earth. Too far away from the main centers of popula tion, it had been
completely ignored, gone stagnant and feral. But still, it was Home. 
When the explorers stepped out, human feet trod on old Earth once more; after an
absence of 560 million years. Mankind was back home.
108109All Tomorrows:
I must conclude  my words with a confession. Mankind, the very species which I’ve
been chronicling from its terrestrial infancy to its domination of the galaxies, is extinct.
All of the beings which you saw on the preceding pages; from the lowly  Worm to the
wind- riding Sail People, from the megalomaniac Gravital  to the ultimate Galac tic citizens,
lie a billion years dead. We are only beginning to piece the story togeth er. What you read
was our best approximation of the truth.
Why did they disappea r? Perhaps it was a final, unimaginable war of annih ilation,
one that transcended the very meaning of “conflict”. Perhaps it was a gradual break-up of
the united galax ies, and every race facing their private  end slowly afterwards. Or
perhaps, the wildest theories suggest, it was a mass migrat ion to another plane of
existence. A journey into somewhere, sometime, something else. But the bottom line is;
we honestly don’t know.
Ultimately, however, what happe ned to Humanity does not matter. Like every
other story, it was a temporary one; indeed long but ultimately ephemeral. It did not
have a coherent ending, but then again it did not need to. The tale of Human ity was
never its ultimate domination of a thousand galaxies, or its mysterious exit into the
unknown. The essence of being human was none of that. Instead, it lay in the radio
conversations of the still-human Machines, in the daily lives of the bizarrely twisted Bug
Facers, in the endless lov e-songs of the carefree Hedonists, th e rebellious demonstrations
of the first true Martians, and in a way, the very life you lead at the moment.
Many through out history were unaware of this most basic fact. The Qu, in dreams
of an ideal future, distorted the worlds they came across. Later on the Gravital, with their
insane  desire to recreate the past, caused the ugliest massacres in the history of the
galaxy.  Even now, it is sickening ly easy for beings  to get lost in false grand narratives,
living out completely driven lives in pursuit of non-existent  codes, ideals, climaxes and
golden ages. In blindly thinking that their stories serve absolute ends, such creatures
almost always end up harming  themselves, if not those around them.
To those like the misguided; look at the story of Man, and come to your senses! It
is not the destination, but the trip that matters. What you do today influence s tomorrow,
not the other way around. Love Today, and seize All Tomorrows!
110The Author, with a billion-year old human skull.
111