Service Accounts
Spellbook v1.7.0 introduces a much requested feature : Running jobs as service accounts.
Why?
Before Spellbook v1.7.0, users could only create and run jobs under their own identity. This meant group owned jobs had to be owned and 
ran by one user only - this was definitely not optimal. For example, if a team member left the organization unexpectedly, every job assigned 
to his identity would start failing once his account is deactivated. Furthermore, transferring these jobs would require admin intervention.
With this new update, users will be able to create jobs under a group and assign the “run as” property to their team’s service account. This 
way, all of their group-owned analytics will run as their service account and not specific group members.
How?
Pre-requisites
A few things to do before following the step-by-step :
Obtain a service account (an Active Directory non-entity user created for a team) - IdAM’s self-serve portal 
Note: If you expect to use Trino with this service account, please email IdAM to have the email property populated. We expect this 
to be automated in the near future.
Add your service account to an Azure Directory group of your choice. (i.e. your team’s security group) -  you can do so through the Azure 
Active Directory portal.
Request access based on the classification:
Unclassified (only) : Request access through the Hogwarts support channel.
Unclassified and/or Protected B: You must request ALPR access for your service account. To do so, email alpr_help-dl@CSE-
CST.GC.CA with your service account name and email.
Step-by-step
There is a 2 step process to create a job as a group and to run it as a service account.
Step 1 - Create the Spellbook service account
1. Login to Spellbook using your service account. (we recommend logging in through an Incognito tab) 
2. Click your top right profile icon and select the “Settings” item from the User Menu  3. Find the “Service account” section and click “Become a Service account”
  4. Select the Group you chose from the Pre-requisites section and click “Submit”
  5. If successful, you should see the following :
 
Step 2 - Use the service account to create a Job
1. Login to Spellbook using your normal user account
2. From the “dashboard” page (squares icon on the left menu), click the “Create” button in the top left
  2.  In the “Basic Details” section (first step of the Wizard), choose the Group you selected in Step 1 in the “Create as…” field :
  3.  A new field called “Run as” should appear. Select the service account’s name you created from Step 1.Congratulations! Your account has now been linked to your group within Spellbook. It can now be used as a service account in the 
next step.
  4. Go through the rest of the Job wizard like usual and create your Job.
 
FAQ
Can I link my service account to multiple groups?
Yes, you can! Once a service account link exists, a button named “Add another group” will appear at the below the list of service accounts.
Click this button and select a group just like you did in Step 1. There are no limits to the number of service account links.
Congratulations! Your new job is owned by your group and will be ran by your service account. 
