Hogwarts Table Features
The Hogwarts Table visualization is the default visualization in Superset. Users are encouraged to use the Hogwarts Table visualization in 
place of Superset’s Table visualization, as numerous features have been added to the Hogwarts Table to fulfill user requirements. 
This page describes the features that have been added to the Hogwarts Table (AgGrid), including those added to replicate features present 
in Superset’s Table visualization, and those which are not (at the time of writing) available in Superset’s Table visualization. 
Search Users can perform a text search on local results when viewing data 
in an Explore or in a Dashboard. Note that this will search only 
returned results; no queries will be reissued. 
 Yes Yes
Pagination Users can configure their chart to show results in pages. Yes Yes
Column Reordering Users can reorder columns in the Hogwarts Table in a Dashboard or 
an Explore. If columns are reordered in the Explore view and the 
chart is save, that column ordering will persist when the chart is 
added to a Dashboard. If columns are reordered when viewing the 
chart in a Dashboard, that ordering will reset every time the 
Dashboard is reloaded. 
Having column order persist after it is set in the Explore view 
provides a method to reorder a large number of columns without 
having to deselect and re-select fields in the leftward control panel. 
*As of 2.0, the Superset Table allows columns to be reordered when 
viewing the chart in a Dashboard. Columns cannot be reordered in 
the Explore except by deselecting and re-selecting fields in the 
leftward field picker. Yes Partially*Feature Notes Available in 
Hogwarts 
TableAvailable in 
Superset 
Table
 
Column Resizing Users can dynamically resize columns in the Hogwarts Table when 
viewing it in a dashboard. 
Auto-sizing options are also available in the column menu (shown 
below). 
 Yes  
Grouping Search results can be grouped locally.
 Yes  
Sorting Users can sort by multiple fields by shift+clicking on an additional 
column header. Yes Partially*
 
*While this feature is also present in the Superset Table, the 
Hogwarts Table displays numbers indicating the order in which fields 
were sorted. 
Copying User can copy cell values by right-clicking and selecting the “Copy” 
option. Alternately, they may select “Copy with Headers” to include 
the column header with the selected field in the copied value.
For example, if the selection illustrated above were copied with 
headers, the copied value would be: 
Note that the underlying value in the database (not the value 
rendered based on advanced types) is currently copied.  
Yes 
Selecting/Emitting Multiple FiltersUsers can select multiple cells in the Hogwarts Table with ctrl+click. 
These selected values can then be emitted by right-clicking and 
selecting “Emit Filters” from the context menu.
 Yes  
1
2start_ip_intend_ip_int
29335599362933559939
Rendering based on Advanced 
TypeIf a dataset field is tagged with a recognized Advanced Type (e.g., 
IPv4), the values in that field will be rendered according to their 
Advanced Type (e.g., IPv4 values will be rendered in human-
readable dotted-decimal notation). 
Currently supported Advanced Types are:
IPv4
IPv6
JSON
Additional Advanced Types will be added in the future. 
 Yes  
Row Numbers Row numbers can be added to the Hogwarts Table in the Explore 
view. They will be pinned to the leftward side of the table, meaning 
they will remain visible even when scrolling horizontally on wide 
tables. Yes  
Pinned Fields Columns in the Hogwarts Table can be pinned in an adhoc manner. 
Note that these pinned columns will not persist between dashboard 
refreshes and will not be saved if added via the Explore view. 
In the image below, note that the “start_ip_int” field has been pinned 
to the left. 
 Yes  
Adhoc Field Selection Fields may be hidden and un-hidden in an adhoc manner when 
viewing the visualization in a Dashboard or an Explore. Note, 
however, that hidden fields will not persist between dashboard 
reloads and cannot be saved via the Explore view. 
 Yes  
JSON Viewer If a user clicks on a cell that contains valid JSON data, and if that 
JSON data is in a field of type JSON, then a modal will open showing 
an expandable JSON viewer (pictured below). Yes  
Export to CSV/Excel Users can export data from the Hogwarts Table to CSV or to an 
Excel file, as shown below. 
*Note that there is another “Export to CSV” option built in to all 
Superset charts (see the vertical … in the upper right), which we Yes Partially*
 recommend not using. It retrieves more data than is displayed in the 
local visualization and may return unexpected results. 
 
