Functions (Fission)
This guide aims to help you get started with Hogwarts Functions (Fission). After following this guide, you should be able to create, test, and 
deploy your first Function on the Hogwarts platform!
You can view the functions and create your own on Spellbook. Look for the f(x) icon!
 
Vocabulary
Creating your Function
Testing your Function
Examples
Feedback
More information & links
Official docs
Vocabulary
Before starting with Fission, here are a few Fission specific concepts you should know about:
Serverless Framework
Functions
Triggers
Environment
Creating your Function
The basics for creating your initial Python Function are the following:
1. Clone templateA framework for building, packaging, and deploying applications without having to spin up your own REST API. This allows you as the 
user to develop your code without worrying about any of the infrastructure to support it!
A Fission Function is what Fission is executing, which in Hogwart's case is the code you develop. These functions are built with the 
template provided. Functions are then pointed to an entry point that defines the main method of your function. These functions are all 
based in Flask.
It is important to note, these functions are stateless. 
The invocation of functions is controlled by what is called, Triggers. This trigger in Hogwarts is a GET, PUT, POST, PATCH, or DELETE 
request to your function. Once that request is called, either through the browser or otherwise, your function will be run. You can capture 
these requests via the Flask library.
Fission functions can be run in the Hogwarts Pyspark Python environment and have access to all the libraries that are within it. Extra 
libraries can be installed with the requirements.txt file in the template.
Extra versions of the Python environment are available: Python 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9. These do not come with preinstalled packages and all 
packages required by your function will need to be in the requirements.txt.2. Authentication
3. Logging
4. Deploy your functionThere is a template repository that you can use to get started. If your repository is inside the CCCS Github, you are ready to go. If you 
are creating the function under another group or your user, you must allow sa-spellbook as a collaborator and message in the 
Microsoft Team's channel to get this approved. 
Built into the Python environment is an authorization package that allows you to control access to the function. The wrapper function 
defaults to ALPR members but can be any valid Azure security group ID.
 
Custom azure Security Group
 
Note: By default, all functions deployed in U are restricted to the hogwarts-unclass-users-sg and all functions deployed in PB are 
restricted to the ALPR group.
1
2
3
4
5from hogwartsfission import auth
@auth.requires_auth ()
def main():
    return "You have ALPR access!"
1
2
3
4
5
6
7from hogwartsfission import auth
AZURE_SEC_GROUP = "abcdef-1234-ghijk-567890"
@auth.requires_auth (AZURE_SEC_GROUP )
def main():
    return "You are in my custom security group!"
When logging in the Spellbook Functions environment, you must use the flask logger as it does not support print() for logging. To do 
this, import current_app from flask.
 
1
2
3
4
5from flask import current_app
def main():
    current_app .logger.info("This is a log message" )
    return "Hello, World"
When creating a function, you will be required to fill out the following information.Testing your Function
Here is how to test your Function
Testing
Examples
To quick start your Function journey, the Hogwarts team offers a repository containing Function templates that can help you start your next 
Function.
Function ExamplesMore information regarding these fields is in the How to Get Started prompt on the right side of the screen here.  After creating your 
function, you will have to deploy it to enable it via this button:
After you have deployed your function, logs will begin to appear as Python validation and logging information become available. This 
will be shown in Spellbook on the right-hand side after deploying.
These logs can be filtered and searched via time queries shown below.
Feedback
We are always looking to improve our documentation. If you encountered any obstacles while going through this guide, feel free to reach 
out to us through our Microsoft teams support channel.
More information & links
Official docs
Fission Concepts
More Fission Functions