Create Job Wizard
 
Introduction
New to SPELLBOOK in 1.7.0 is the new Job Wizard, which allows you to create jobs in spellbook with ease. This feature improves upon 
existing job creation in spellbook, providing a number of new features that provide a faster, more convenient job creation experience.
Previously, the create job form did not provide any sort of template to build your job from, and required you to either manually copy an 
existing job, or write one from scratch. This led to a higher barrier of entry to users wanting to schedule a job.
Creating a Job
In order to create a job, you press the same button as before:
From here, instead of the old drawer, a new dialog will appear:
 
Similarly to before, you can specify the name of your job, the DAG ID, an optional description, and the classification of the job (if working in 
a multi-classification deployment). You can also expand the extra fields to add tags and external references, as before.
Next is the optional DAG Template/Upload page. This will allow you to pre-fill the DAG Configuration before editing it, either with a DAG 
Template provided by spellbook, or a file from your computer.
If you choose a DAG template, the Job Wizard will automatically prefill a number of the fields that a user had to manually fill out previously. 
Pressing next will move to the DAG Configuration Step.
It isn’t necessary to select a template or upload a file. If you want to write a DAG completely from scratch, simply press “Next”.Once you proceed to the DAG configuration step, you’ll note that there are a number of highlighted keys you will need to fill out before 
submitting your DAG. These include things like the crontab schedule, or the task names of the job’s tasks. Note that some of these fields 
are automatically pre-filled, but can be edited, such as the owner, start date and email arguments.
Once you have filled out all of the required fields, you can proceed to the Preview and Submit step. Here, the wizard validates your job and 
ensures there are no outstanding issues. If there are none, you should see the following:
If there are outstanding issues, they will be listed here. Clicking on them will return you to the related page so you can fix them:
Once any issues are resolved, you can submit the job. Congrats, you’ve successfully used the Job Wizard for the first time!
Questions?
Any questions about this feature can be asked in the HOGWARTS support chat. If you have a DAG template you’d like to add, or any other 
suggestions, please let us know there. Thanks!
 
