 
 1 
Introduction  
The Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSC) has developed prioritised mitigation strategies, in the form of the 
Strategies to Mitigate Cyber Security Incidents , to help organisations protect themselves against various cyber 
threats. The most effective of these mitigation strategies are the Essential  Eight.  
This publication details a process for undertaking assessments of the Essential Eight. In doing so, it includes guidance on 
assessment methods that can be used for assessing both the implementation and effectiveness of controls that 
underpin the Es sential Eight – as articulated within the Essential Eight Maturity Model  (November 2022 release).  
This publication  should be read and used  in conjunction with other ACSC  guidance  and tools . This  includ es the: 
 Essential Eight Maturity Model  
 Essential Eight Maturity Model FAQ  
 Essential Eight Assessment Report Template  
 Essential Eight assessment toolkit . 
Note, all vendor products mentioned within this publication are for illustrative purposes only and should not be 
interpreted as an explicit  endorsement by the ACSC.  
Overview  
Assessments  against the Essential Eight  are conducted using  the Essent ial Eight Maturity Model . This maturity model 
describes three target  matu rity levels (Maturity Level One  through to Maturity Level Three) which are based on 
mitigating increasing levels of adversary targeting  and tradecraft . The maturity model also includ es Maturity Level Zero  
which  exists for capturing instances in which the requirements of Maturity Level One are not met.  
Although the approach to conducting an assessment depends on the size and complexity of a system, there are 
foundational principles that are common  to each assessment. As such, t he guidance in this publication  should be 
incorporated by assessors, noting that assessors should still use their own judgement and expertise.  
While the Essential Eight may be appli ed to a non-Microsoft Windows system , specific mitigation  strategies , or parts 
thereof,  may not be applicable  or even the most effective mitigation strateg ies available . In these instances, such as for 
Linux  workstations and servers , cloud computing  or enterprise mobility , organisations should consider alternative 
guidance provided by the ACSC.  
Finally, i n determining compensating  control effectiveness, a ssessors should ensure that any compensating  controls 
that have been implemented provide a n equivalent  level of protection  to those recommended under  the Essential Essential Eight  
Assessment Process Guide  
First published:  November 2022  
Last updated:  June  2023   
 2 
Eight . This will assist in ensuring  that an equivalent level of  overall protection  against a specific level of adversary 
targeting and trade craft can be achieved  and maintained . 
Evidence quality  
In conducting an assessment, assessors need to gather and review credible evidence to support conclusions they draw 
on the effectiveness of controls.  In general terms, the evidence  used to determine  the effectiveness of controls will vary 
in quality depending on the approach  taken . As such, w hen conducting an assessment, assessors s hould seek to gather 
and use  the highest quality evidence where reasonably practicable . This guide defines four levels of e vidence quality : 
 Excellent evidence:  Testing a control with a simulated activity designed to confirm it is in place and effective (e.g. 
attempting to run an application to check application control  rulesets ). 
 Good evidence:  Reviewin g the configuration of  a system through the system’ s interface to determine whether it  
should enforce an expected policy.  
 Fair evidence:  Reviewing a copy of a system’s configuration (e.g. using reports or  screenshot s) to determine  
whether  it should enforce an expected policy . 
 Poor evidence:  A policy or verbal statement  of intent  (e.g. sighting mention of  controls within documentation ). 
Determining effective implementation of  
mitigation strategies  
Upon concluding assessment activities, assessors will need to determine whether mitig ation strateg ies were  
implemented effectively or not. This determination requires a combination of judgement and consideration of the 
following factors:  
 adoption of a risk -based approach to the implementation of mitigation strategies  
 ability to test the mi tigation strategies across an accurate representative sample of workstations  (including 
laptops) , servers  and network devices  
 level of assurance gained from assessment activities and any evidence provided (noting the quality of evidence)  
 any exceptions , including associated compensating controls , and whether they have been accepted by an 
appropriate authority as part of a formal exception process . 
Assessors should use the ACSC’s standardised assessment outcomes which are:  
 Effective : The organisation is effe ctively meeting the control’s objective . 
 Ineffective : The organisation is not adequately meeting the control’s objective . 
 Alternate control : The organisation is effectively meeting the control’s objective  through a n alternate  control.  
 Not assessed : The control has not yet been assessed.  
 Not applicable : The control does not apply to the  system  or environment . 
 No visibility : The assessor was unable to obtain adequate visibility of a control’s implementation.  
It is important that assessors do not allow organis ational risk acceptance without sufficient compensating controls as a 
justification for not implementing a mitigation strategy (e.g. a system owner has risk accepted not implementing 
application control or multi -factor authentication). In these scenarios,  without adequate compensating controls , the 
mitigation strategy is considered to be not implemented.   
 3 
For a system owner to claim they have implemented a mitigation strategy, all controls specified within the mitigation 
strategy must be assessed as ‘effecti ve’ or ‘alternate control ’. If one of the controls specified for a mitigation strategy is 
assessed as ‘ ineffective ’, the system owner cannot claim to have met the requirements for that maturity level. In turn, 
this applies to the determination of whether a  system owner has met the target maturity level for the ir system (i.e. if 
one or more mitigation strategies are deemed to be not implemented then the target maturity level for the system 
cannot be claimed to have  been  met). 
Where exceptions to a mitigation  strategy’s controls have been identified, the assessor should review and evaluate any 
compensating controls that are in place to determine whether they address the intent of the original controls and are 
implemented effectively. Two  examples have been pro vided below.  
Example:  During an internal review, an organisation identified a low-risk Windows server that could not be patched. 
As a result, the organisation implemented a plan to decommission the server within two months.  
In this situation, it was still important for the organisation to apply compensating controls that reduced the risk to an 
acceptable level, and to align with the requirements of the Essential Eight’s exception process. As a result, a risk 
owner was assigned,  and strong compensating contr ols were put in place.  
In this instance, as the exception was being effectively managed and strong compensating controls were in place, an 
assessor determined that the exception should not preclude the organisation from reaching their target maturity 
level . Conversely, if the organisation had not applied strong compensating controls, it would not have aligned with 
the requirements of the Essential Eight’s exception process and should have precluded the organisation from 
reaching their target maturity level.  
 
Example:  During an internal review, an organisation identified cloud services that did not have available multi -factor 
authentication functionality enabled. In assessing the situation, the organisation decided it was not worth the time 
and effort to ena ble such functionality, not to mention the complaints they expected they would receive from users.  
In this situation, the organisation had chosen to simply accept the risk of not implementing a control rather than 
implementing strong compensating controls.  
In this instance, as the exception was not being effectively managed nor were strong compensating controls in place, 
an assessor determined that the organisation should be precluded from reaching their target maturity level.  
 
It is important that the use  of exceptions for a system are documented and approved by an appropriate authority 
through a formal process. Documentation for exceptions should include the following:  
 detail, scope and justification for exceptions  
 detail of compensating controls  associat ed with exceptions , including:  
 detail, scope and justification for compensating controls  
 expected implementation life time  of compensating controls  
 when compensating controls will next be reviewed  
 system risk rating before and after the implementation of co mpensating controls  
 any caveats placed on the use of the system as a result of exception s 
 acceptance by an appropriate authority of the residual risk for the system  
 when the necessity  of exceptions will next be considered  by an appropriate authority (notin g exceptions should 
not be approved beyond one year).   
 4 
The appropriate use of a formal exception  process, along with compensating controls , should not preclude an 
organisation from being assessed a s meeting the requirements for their  target  maturity level.  
Stages of an assessment  
At a high -level, assessments are comprise d of four  stages:  
 Stage 1:  The assessor plans and prepares for the assessment.  
 Stage 2: The assessor determines the scope and approach for the assessment . 
 Stage 3: The assessor assesses the controls associated with each of the mitigation strategies . 
 Stage 4: The assessor develops the security assessment report.  
The activities and considerations for each stage of an assessment are discussed in further detail below.  
Stage 1: Assessment planning and preparation  
Assessment planning  
Prior to commencing an assessment, the assessor should conduct assessment planning activities. These activities 
require the assessor to discuss with the system owner : 
 system classification and assessment scope  (see furth er detail  below ) 
 access to low and high -privileged user accounts,  devices, documentation, personnel , and facilities  
 intended assessment approach  and any approvals required to run scripts and tools (see further detail  below ) 
 evidence collection and protecti on, including any requirements following the conclusion of the assessment  
 where the security assessment report will be developed  (e.g. on an assessor’s device or on an alternative device)  
 approach to stakeholder engagement and consultation  (including key p oints of contact)  
 whether any managed service providers or other outsourced provider s manage any aspect s of the system  
(including appropriate points of contact)  
 access to  any relevant prior  security assessment reports for the system  
 appropriate use , retent ion and marketing of the security assessment report  by both parties . 
Assessors may also develop an assessment test plan and share it with the system owner . Example assessment test plan s 
are included as Annex A  through Annex C . 
Note, test cases listed withi n the example  assessment  test plans included as Annex A through Annex C should not be 
treated  as mandatory  assessment  require ments . Rather, assessors should apply their own judgement and experience in 
the development of their own assessment test plans.   
 5 
Stage 2: Determination of assessment scope and 
approach  
Determine assessment scope  
In determining the assessment scope,  assessors should first clarify the target maturity level with the system owner, 
noting that the Essential Eight is required to be implement ed and assessed as a package. For example, if a system 
owner has not previously had an assessment demonstrating  that they have implemented Maturity Level One , they 
should not begin  an assessment against Maturity Level Two  until they have done so , and  likew ise for  Maturity Level 
Two before being assessed against  Maturity Level Three.  
Having identified a suitable target maturity level, the assessor should familiarise themselves with the requirements for 
that maturity level as it will impact the components or aspects of the system within scope of the assessment.  At this 
time it  may also be useful to request an approximate percentage breakdown of the operating systems used on 
workstations and servers for the system . 
Once the scope of the assessment has been iden tified, and agreed upon with the system owner, a more accurate 
determination of the assessment ’s duration and any milestones will likely be possible.  
The scope of the assessment should be documented  within the security assessment report. Any components or aspects 
of a system deemed out -of-scope should also be documented and accompanied by a justification for their exclusion.  
Determine assessment approach  
In determining a suitable assessment approach, both qualitative and quantitative testing techniques shou ld be 
considered. For example, qualitative testing techniques include documentation reviews and interviews with personnel 
administering or managing system security , while quantitative testing techniques include system configuration reviews 
and the use of s cripts and tools. Sample sizes for testing should also be determined in consultation with the system 
owner, with the aim to assess an accurate representative sample population of workstations (including laptops), servers 
and network devices.  
Conducting ass essments using interviews, reports and screenshots will always be inferior to conducting assessments 
using scripts and  tools. Particularly as scripts and  tools often assess many workstations and servers on a network, rather 
than a single sample workstation  or server, and often identify issues that may be missed in interviews or overlooked by 
human analysis of reports and configuration settings.  If adequate assessment scripts and tools are not already present  
on a system , assessors may wish to use their own scripts and tools following  approval by the system owner.  
Any assessment limitations including sample sizes and constraints on technical testing should be documented within 
the security assessment report . 
Stage 3: Assessment of controls  
The assessment of e ach mitigation strategy is performed by reviewing and testing the effectiveness of control s. This 
section provides guidance on the approach to assessing each mitigation strategy at a given target  maturity level , along 
with relevant  assessment consideration s. Guidance on determining  the effectiveness of the controls within  each 
mitigation strategy is also provided within  this section.  
Assessment guidance for maturity levels in this section is cumulative. For example, the guidance provided in the 
Maturity Lev el Two section is focused on unique requirements above those of Maturity Level One.  Likewise, the  
 6 
guidance provided in the Maturity Level Three section is focused on unique requirements above those of Maturity Level 
Two. This aligns with the manner in whic h assessments should be conducted against target maturity levels.  
Maturity Level One  
The focus of this maturity level is adversaries who are content to simply leverage commodity tradecraft  that is widely 
available to gain access to, and control of, a syste m. For example, adversaries opportunistically using a publicly -
available exploit for a security vulnerability in an  unpatched internet -facing service , or authenticating to an internet -
facing service using credentials that were stolen, reused, brute forced or guessed.  
Generally, adversaries are looking for any victim rather than a specific victim and will opportunistically seek common 
weaknesses in many targets rather than investing heavily in gaining access to a specific target. Adversaries will employ 
comm on social engineering techniques to trick users into weakening the security of a system and execut ing malicious 
code , for example , via a Microsoft Office macro.  
Adversaries will also often seek to compromise user accounts. If successful, they may seek to e xploit privileges 
associated with th ese accounts or  escalate privileges to higher levels. Depending on the ir intent, adversaries may also 
seek to steal or destroy data (including backups ) or make data  otherwise unavailable through various denial -of-service  
techniques.  
Application control  
Context  
Application control assessments  can be done without tools but efforts will be severely limited in their effectiveness and 
are likely to miss edge cases that adversaries would look to exploit. For example, adversarie s may use custom tools to 
scan for weak or vulnerable paths on a system. This c ould  be achieved with a Microsoft Office macro.  
It is important to note that the last major update to the maturity model introduced compiled Hypertext Markup 
Language (HTML) (.c hm files), HTML applications (.hta files) and control panel applets (.cpl files) to the list of file types 
that need to be controlled. Depending on the application control solution selected, it may not support these file types.  
When conducting assessments,  paths for standard user profiles and temporary folders used by operating system s, web 
browsers , and email clients can include those from the list below. Note, depending on the system configuration, there 
may be overlap (e.g. %temp%  and %tmp%  generally res ide within %userprofile% \*). 
 %userprofile% \* 
 %temp% \* 
 %tmp% \* 
 %windir% \Temp \*. 
To check if application control is implemented within the user profile directory, attempt to run a benign executable file 
inside the directory. The executables tested should cov er .exe, .com , .dll, .ocx, .ps 1, .bat,  .vbs, .js, .msi, .mst , .msp , .chm , 
.hta, and .cpl . If any of the executables run within the user profile directory  or operating system temporary folders , 
application control is ineffective.  
Note, while a dedicated app lication control solution is not required at Maturity Level One (i.e. file system permissions 
can be used instead), organisations may still choose to implement a dedicated application control solution if they 
intend to eventually implement requirements for  Maturity Level Two.  
Assessment guidance  
The section  below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.    
 7 
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordere d by effectiveness)  
The execution of 
executables, software 
libraries, scripts, 
installers, compiled 
HTML, HTML 
applications and control 
panel applets is 
prevented on 
workstations from 
within standard user 
profiles and temporary 
folders used by the 
operati ng system, web 
browsers and email 
clients.  Due to the complexity of advanced file system permissions , and various user groups that 
a user account may belong to, the only truly effective way to check application control 
implementations is to attempt to writ e to and execute from all locations accessible to a 
user on the file system. There are several  free tools available to support the assessment 
of this control , including the ACSC’s Essential Eight Maturity Verification Tool (E8MVT) 
and Application Control V erification Tool  (ACVT) , AirLock Digital’s Application Whitelist 
Auditor , and CyberArk’s Evasor.  There are also several  paid tools available. In choosing a 
tool to use, make sure  that it has been thoroughly tested  beforehand to ensure it is fit -
for-purpose . 
If the system owner is willing to allow the use of trusted Microsoft tools, but not other 
third -party tools, the SysInternals AccessChk application can be used to generate the 
output of folder permissions , noting this  is only relevant to a path -based approach . For 
example, by running ‘ accesschk -dsuvw [path] > report.txt ’, it is possible to generate a 
list of all writable paths and their access permissions for all users. Note, the ‘ whoami 
/groups ’ command would also need to be run to determine which use r groups a typical 
standard user belonged to in order to determine the effective permissions for each path.  
Alternatively, PowerShell cmdlets can be used to test and review  AppLocker policy  
where applicable . 
For a system on which tools canno t be run, assuming a path -based approach is used, 
screenshots of the ‘effective access’ permissions for specified folders can be requested. 
This, however , has limitations, because  unless screenshots of access permissions are 
requested for  every folder and sub-folder (for  which there may be many ), it will not be 
possible to comprehensively assess whether read, write and execute permissions exist 
for a given user. At a minimum, screenshots for key paths (such as temporary folders 
used by the operating system,  web browsers and email clients ) should be requested and 
examined to determine whether inheritance is set, noting that at any point in a path , 
application control inheritance previously set by an operating system may be disabled by 
an application installer . 
 
Patch applications  
Context  
Most vendors of internet -facing services regularly release updated versions of their applications to fix security 
vulnerabilities. App lications that exist on a system can be compared to the latest versions available from the vendor to 
determine whether existing versions are the latest, and if not, how long -ago updates were made available by the 
vendor , based on release dates and patch notes. Services such as the SANS Internet  Storm Centre , Microsoft Security 
Response Centre  or the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency ’s Known Exploited Vulnerabilities Catalog  can 
be used to determine whether public exploits exist for a given internet -facing service.   
 8 
Assessment guidance  
The section  below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
An automated method 
of asset discovery  is 
used at least fortnightly 
to support the detection 
of assets for subsequent 
vulnerability scanning 
activities.  Ask for a demonstration of a method of asset discovery  being used in an automated manner 
to identify assets associated with the system, such as  workstations, servers and network 
devices. This may be a dedicated asset discovery tool or it may be equivalent functionality 
built into a vulnerability scanner.  In addition , request evidence of previous automated asset 
discovery scans and pay attention t o the date/time stamp and their scope . 
Note, while an automated method of asset discovery should be used at least fortnightly, 
system owners may elect to align the frequency of asset discovery scans to more frequent 
timeframes used for vulnerability scans (such as daily or weekly) in order to perform both 
activities at the same time for optimal effect.  
Finally , in addition to identifying assets for follow -on vulnerability scanning activities, 
automated asset discovery  can also be used to identify any unauth orised assets that may 
have been connected to a system between scheduled scans. If unknown assets are 
identified as part of asset discovery scans, they should be immediately investigated and 
treated as suspicious until confirmed otherwise.  
A vulnerability  scanner 
with an up -to-date 
vulnerability database is 
used for vulnerability 
scanning activities.  Ask for a demonstration of a vulnerability scan . In addition , request evidence of the 
date/time stamp of when the vulnerability database used for the scan was  last updated. 
Ideally, this should be within 24 hours of the vulnerability scan taking place.  
A vulnerability scanner 
is used at least daily  to 
identify missing patches 
or updates for security 
vulnerabilities in 
internet -facing services.  Ask for a demons tration of a vulnerability scan . In addition , request evidence of previous 
vulnerability scans and pay attention to the date/time stamp and scope of event logs. Check 
whether the list of scanned internet -facing services matches the internet -facing services . 
Request evidence of previous vulnerability scans and pay attention to the date/time stamp 
and scope of event logs. 
A vulnerability scanner 
is used at least 
fortnightly to identify 
missing patches or 
updates for security 
vulnerabilities in office 
produ ctivity suites, web 
browsers  and their 
extensions , email 
clients, PDF software , 
and security products.  Ask for a demonstration of a vulnerability scan . In addition , request evidence of previous 
vulnerability scans and pay attention to the date/time stamp a nd scope of event logs. 
Request evidence of previous vulnerability scans and pay attention to the date/time stamp 
and scope of event logs.  
 9 
Patches, updates or 
vendor mitigations for 
security vulnerabilities 
in internet -facing 
services are applied 
within  two weeks of 
release, or within 48 
hours if an exploit exist s. A network -based vulnerability scanner can be used to identify internet -facing services, their 
versions and install dates. This can then be reviewed alongside the date of release for each 
to de termine whether patch timeframes have been met. The use of these tools can quickly 
determine service  versions and whether they are the latest versions available from vendor s. 
There are several  free tools available to support the assessment of this control , including the 
ACSC’s E8MVT , Nessus Essentials, Nexpose Community Edition, OpenVAS and Qualys 
Community Edition.  There are also several paid tools available. In choosing a tool to use, 
make sure that it has been thoroughly tested beforehand to ensure it is  fit-for-purpose.  
Note, a scanner may not identify missing vendor mitigations such as specific configuration 
changes.  
If a network -based vulnerability scanner cannot be used,  screenshots of versions of internet -
facing services can be requested. This allo ws for manual checking against the latest versions 
available from vendors.  Alternatively, a list of services  may be requested (noting that 
adversaries often exploit security vulnerabilities in internet -facing services that the system 
owner may have forgott en about or that have been installed  by users without the system 
owner’s knowledge).  
Patches, updates or 
vendor mitigations for 
security vulnerabilities 
in office productivity 
suites, web browsers  
and their extensions , 
email clients, PDF 
software , and sec urity 
products are applied 
within one month of 
release.  A vulnerability scanner can be used to assess applications , their versions  and install dates . 
The above output must be reviewed alongside the date of release for each application to 
determine whether the timeframe has been met.  
 
 
 
 
  
 10 
Alternatively, PowerShell  can be used  to identify applications with registered uninstall 
functionality. However, this method alone will not always cover all applications that are 
installed on a system. As a result, it s hould be combined with the list of installed applications 
within ‘Programs and Features’.  
While this approach can be used for assessments, the limitations in coverage should be 
noted. For key applications though, it will likely be sufficient. If any key ap plications appear 
to be missing in reports provided, this should be raised for clarification.  
Below is a PowerShell script  to output a list of installed applications with registered uninstall 
functionality. This list should be reviewed in conjunction with the list of installed 
applications within ‘Control Panel – Programs – Programs and Features’ to ensure no 
applications are missed.  
function  Analyze(  $p, $f) { 
    Get-ItemProperty  $p |foreach  { 
        if (($_.DisplayName)  -or ($_.version))  { 
            [PSCustomObject]@{  
                From  = $f; 
                Name  = $_.DisplayName;  
                Version  = $_.DisplayVersion;  
                Install  = $_.InstallDate  
            } 
        } 
    } 
} 
$s = @() 
$s += Analyze  ‘HKLM: \Software \Microsoft \Windo ws\CurrentVersion \Uninstall \*’ 64 
$s += Analyze  ‘HKLM: \Software \Wow6432Node \Microsoft \Windows \CurrentVersion \Uninstall \*’ 32 
$s | Sort-Object  -Property  Name  
The combined list of installed applications must be reviewed alongside the date of release 
for each  application patch to determine whether the timeframe has been met.  
If tools cannot be used,  request a demonstration that shows  the versions of installed 
applications  and their install date . This allows for manual checking against the latest 
versions ava ilable from vendors.  
Internet -facing services, 
office productivity 
suites, web browsers  
and their extensions , 
email clients, PDF 
software , Adobe Flash 
Player, and security 
products that are no 
longer supported by 
vendors are removed.  A vulnerability scann er can be used to assess applications and whether they are end of life.  
Request a demonstration that shows  the versions of the referenced applications and 
services . This allows for manual checking against the list of supported versions.  In addition, 
chec k if hotfix KB4577586 has been applied to demonstrate that Adobe Flash Player is no 
longer supported.  Note, this hotfix will only remove Adobe Flash Player if it was installed by 
Windows. If Adobe Flash Player was  installed manually from another source, it  will not be 
removed  by this hotfix.  
  
 11 
Configure Microsoft Office macro settings  
Context  
All users should be denied the ability to execute Microsoft Office macros by default unless they have  a specific business 
requirement . If certain users are required to  run Microsoft Office macros,  they should be restricted to only the specific 
application s required (rather than all Microsoft Office applications) . In addition , a record of the ir business requirement  
and associated  approva ls should be kept. This  record sho uld align with the list of us ers within the A ctive Directory  
group that have permission  to run Microsoft Office macros. Note, o nce a business requirement  can no longer be 
demonstrated by a user , permission t o run Microsoft Office macros should be revoked.  
Microsoft Defender is commonly used to per form Microsoft Office macro antivirus scanning . This  product uses the 
Antimalware Scan Interface to integrate applications and services with any antimalware installed on a machine. Other 
antivirus solutions may use  this interface or other processes t o scan Microsoft Office macros.  
Microsoft Office applications that can execute Microsoft Office macros include Microsoft Access, Microsoft Excel, 
Microsoft Outlook, Microsoft PowerPoint, Microsoft Project, Microsoft Publ isher, Microsoft Visio and Microsoft Word . 
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assess ment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Microsoft Office macros 
are disabled for users 
that do not have a 
demonstrated business 
requirement.  The ACSC’s E8MVT can be used to assist with assessing this control. Refer to supporting 
E8MVT documentation.  
The ‘gpresult’  command can be run on workstations  to generate an RSoP report to 
identify Microsoft Office macro settings applied via group policy  settings . Within the 
report, look for the ‘VBA Macro Notification Settings’ setting at ‘ User 
Configuration \Polic ies\Administration Templates \<Microsoft Office 
Application> \Application Settings \Security \Trust Center \’. 
The ‘VBA Macro Notification Settings’ setting should be enabled and configured to 
‘Disable all macros without notification’ for most users. If this se tting is not configured, 
all Microsoft Office macros will be disabled but users will receive a prompt via the Trust 
Bar asking whether they would like to enable them.  
For users with a demonstrated business requirement for Microsoft Office macro use, 
this g roup policy setting may either not be configured, disabled or enabled and set to 
any other setting – as long as antivirus scanning is enabled and Microsoft Office macros 
in files originating from the internet  are being blocked.   
 12 
Within each Microsoft Offi ce application, check or request demonstration showing 
Trust Center macro settings (File – Options – Trust Center – Trust Center Settings – 
Macro Settings)  for users that are not allowed to run Microsoft Office macros and for 
users with a business requirem ent to do so . For users that are allowed to run Microsoft 
Office macros, request documentation that outlines the business need. Consider 
requesting the percentage of the organisation’s userbase that have been granted 
approval to run Microsoft Office macros . 
For the assessment of Microsoft Office macro security, identify what setting is selected 
for ‘macro settings’. For most users , the desired setting should be ‘Disable all macros 
without notification’. However, for users with a demonstrated business requir ement 
for Microsoft Office macro use, any other setting is acceptable at this maturity level . In 
these instances, identify any compensating controls such as  antivirus scanning and if 
Microsoft Office macros in files originating from the internet  are being blocked.  
Microsoft Office macros 
in files originating from 
the internet  are 
blocked.  The ACSC’s E8MVT can be used to assist with assessing this control. Refer to supp orting 
E8MVT documentation.  
Within the RS oP report, look for  the ‘Block macros from run ning in Office files from the 
Internet ’ setting at ‘ User Configuration \Policies \Administration Templates \<Microsoft 
Office Application> \Application Settings \Security \Trust Center \’. It should be enabled.  
If this setting is not configured, all Microsoft Off ice macros from the internet  will be 
able to run.  In addition, i f users have the ability to access a file’s properties, they  can 
remove the Mark of the Web . To prevent this , the ‘Hide mechanisms to remove zone 
information’ setting at ‘User Configuration \Policies \Administrative 
Templates \Windows Components \Attachment Manager \’ should also be enabled.  
Users can also remove the Mark of the Web by  copying files from NTFS formatted 
storage media to external FAT/FAT32/exFAT formatted storage media and back. Unles s 
external storage media (which is typically FAT32/exFAT formatted) is disabled for a 
system, it will be difficult to prevent users bypassing this control if they know how to – 
or adversaries tell them how to (which is more likely at higher maturity levels ). 
Microsoft Office macro 
antivirus scanning is 
enabled.  The ACSC’s E8MVT can be used to assist with assessing this control. Refer to supporting 
E8MVT documentation.  
Check if the following group policy setting is enabled for each Microsoft Office 
applic ation. Within the RSoP report, look for  the ‘Macro  Runtime  Scan  Scope ’ setting at 
‘User  Configuration/Policies/Administrative  Templates/Microsoft  Office <Version>/  
Security  Settings/Macro  Runtime  Scan  Scope ’. It should be enabled  with a value of 
either : 
0 - No macro scanning  
1 - Macros in files with the MoTW (Default)  
2 - Macros in all files (Ideal) . 
Alternatively, a pseudo -malicious Microsoft Office macro that contains an EICAR 
antivirus test string can be used for testing purposes.  The ACSC’s E8MVT has a benign 
sample file that can be used for testing without running the tool.   
 13 
If an Antimalware Scan Interface compatible antivirus product is not being used, ask for 
a screenshot of any Microsoft Office macro scanning configuration settings that might 
be pr esent.  
Microsoft Office macro 
security settings cannot 
be changed by users.  The ACSC’s E8MVT can be used to assist with assessing this control.  Refer to supporting 
E8MVT documentation.  
Within the RSoP report, look for the ‘VBA Macro Notification Setting s’ setting at ‘ User 
Configuration \Policies \Administration Templates \<Microsoft Office Application> \ 
Application Settings \Security \Trust Center \’. If it is either enabled or disabled,  then  
users will not be able to change their Microsoft Office macro securi ty settings.  
Using  a user account , open each Microsoft Office application  and attempt to change 
Microsoft Office macro security settings in the Trust Centre.  If Microsoft Office macro 
security settings have been configured via group policy  settings , they  should appear 
greyed out.  
 
User application hardening  
Context  
Adversaries are known to indiscriminately use ‘malvertising’ in their  attempt s to compromise systems. Blocking web 
advertisements using web browser add-ins or extensions , or via web content fi ltering , can prevent the compromise of a 
system.  
Internet  Explorer 11 lacks many of the security features of modern web browsers and ceased to be supported by 
Microsoft on 15 June 2022 . As such, it is more regularly targeted by adversaries. Ideally, Intern et Explorer 11 should be 
removed from systems and Microsoft Edge (running in ‘IE mode’ for legacy sites) , or other modern web browsers , 
should be used instead . 
Web browser security set tings should be configured via group p olicy  settings . In addition, d efau lt web browser security 
settings should not be relied upon as users may tinker with the se settings to enable content or change settings when 
guided to do so by adversaries. Web browser security settings that are configured via group policy  settings  typical ly 
appear greyed out to users, have a hover over message explaining the setting is configured by their organisation or 
have an icon such as a padlock.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting  a method, the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.    
 14 
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Web browsers do not 
process  Java from the 
internet . A list of the web browsers installed on a system can be derived from the list of all 
installed applications. For each web browser installed on the system, visit a 
specific web page that contains Java , such as the Is Java installed?  website.  
Additionally, review any  plug -ins or extensions that are installed for each web 
browser present on the system. This can be used to check whether any web 
browsers have Java plug -ins or extensions installed, and if so, whether th ey are 
disabled.  
If the system owner requires Java content to be accessed on their intranet, other 
controls should be assessed to determine whether  internet -based Java content is 
blocked via a web content filter.  
Web browsers do not 
process  web 
advertisem ents  from 
the internet . Check whether web browsers have either an ad blocker add -in or extension 
installed. Alternatively,  check  whether a web content filter  or proxy  is blocking 
web advertisements. A simple check is to request a user  to browse to  a websit e 
that is known to display ads (to observe if any ads are displayed) or to browse to 
AdBlock Tester  website (for comprehensive testing) and provide a screenshot of 
the results.  
Note , built -in settings  within web browsers to block pop -ups do not meet the 
intent of this control . 
Internet  Explorer  11 
does not process  
content from the 
internet . Determine whether Internet  Explorer 11 is installed on the system. If it is, attempt  
to access any websi te on the internet , such as https://www.google.com.au . 
Check that  Internet  Explorer 11 is not the default web browser (Settings – Apps – 
Default apps – Web browser) and check for  any file associations (Settings – Apps – 
Default apps – Choose default applications by file type) tied to Internet  Explorer 
11. 
Web browser security 
settings cannot be 
changed by users.  Check  the security settings of each web browse r present on the system . Identify if 
settings are greyed o ut (Internet  Explorer  11 and Mozilla Firefox), have an icon 
with a hover over message that says ‘This setting is managed by your 
organisation’ (Microsoft Edge) or ‘This setting is managed by your administrator’ 
(Google Chrome). This indicates that settings  have been configured  via group 
policy  settings and cannot  be changed by users.  In addition, identify whether Java 
Control Panel settings can be changed by the user.  
 
Restrict administrative privileges  
Context  
Policies , processes  and procedures for managi ng privileged access to systems should be documented and enforced 
within organisational workflows. In doing so, p rivileged access to systems and applications should be  requested v ia a 
form , service desk ticket or email from user s, and require approval from  a supervisor  or application owner , to maintain  
 15 
a record of all such requests . System owners  should also maintain a list of all applications on their system that require 
privileged access.  
Privileged accounts are often targeted by adversaries for their gre ater control and access to organisational resources. 
For this reason, privileged accounts should not have access to the internet , email and web services.  
Note, while no constraints are placed on how privileged and unprivileged operating environments are se parated for 
privileged users at Maturity Level One, organisations may choose to implement an approach that avoids virtualising a 
privileged operating environment within an unprivileged operating environment if they intend to eventually implement 
requiremen ts for Maturity Level Two.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (o rdered by effectiveness)  
Requests for privileged 
access to systems and 
applications are validated 
when first requested.  Request copies of forms, support  tickets or emails provided by users requesting access – 
along with the support of their supervisor or applicable application owner. This can then 
be compared to screenshots of accounts with privileged access to determine if there are 
any discrepancies.  
Privileged accounts  
(excluding privileged 
service accounts)  are 
prevented from accessing 
the internet , email and 
web services.  Attempt to browse the internet  as a privileged user , review the internet  proxy  on the 
network  to determine whether it is configured to block traffic from privileged accounts 
and run the below PowerShell command to check if privileged  accounts have access to 
mailboxes and email addresses : 
Get-ADUser -Filter {(admincount -eq 1) -and (emailaddress -like “*”) -and (enabled -eq 
$true)} -Properties EmailAddress | Select samaccountname, emailaddress  
Tools such as BloodHound  can assist in identifying privileged users that may be missed 
when utilising PowerShell alone.  
Privileged users use 
separate privileged and 
unprivileged operati ng 
environments.  Discuss how privileged operating environments have been implemented for the 
management of the system.  Note, at this maturity level there are no constraints on how 
this can be implemented  beyond that separate privileged and unprivileged ope rating 
environments have been implemented.  
Unprivileged accounts 
cannot logon to privileged 
operating environments . Attempt to logon to a privileged workstation using a standard user account.  
Bloodhound  can be used to assess whether any unprivileged accounts have connected to 
privileged environments by looking for cached credentials.   
 16 
Privileged accounts 
(excluding local 
administrator accounts) 
cannot logon to 
unprivileged operating 
environments.  Request a demonstration of a privileged account attempting to logon to a standard user 
workstation.  Note, the moment a privileged account’s username and password are 
entered into a standard user workstati on, the account should be considered 
compromised (noting this is the reason behind having separate operating environments). 
This test should be done using a privileged account set up specifically for this purpose. 
The privileged account should then be remo ved immediately after testing is complete.  
Bloodhound  can be used to assess whether any privileged accounts have connected to 
unprivileged envir onments by looking for cached credentials.  
 
Patch operating systems  
Context  
Operating system vendors regularly publish updates  to address security vulnerabilities. In addition, u nsupported and 
out-of-date operating systems of internet -facing workstations and servers are a  common target for adversaries.  
While o perating systems of workstations, servers and network devices that are not  internet -facing are at a lower risk of 
exploitation , as adversar ies need  to compromise another system to then obtain network -based access to the 
unpatched operating system , it is still important that such operating systems are patched in a reasonable timeframe 
given the level of targeting and tradecraft the system owner is attempting to protect their system against.  
Services suc h as the SANS Internet  Storm Centre , Microsoft Security Response Centre  or the Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency ’s Known Exploited Vulnerabilities Catalog  can be used to determine whether public 
exploits exist fo r operating systems of workstations, servers and network devices.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly con sidered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
An automated method 
of asset discovery  is 
used at least fortnightly 
to support the detection 
of assets for subsequent 
vulnerability scanning 
activities.  Ask for a demonstration of a method of  asset discovery  being used in an automated 
manner to identify assets associated with the system, such as workstations, servers and 
network devices. This may be a dedicated asset discovery tool or it may be equivalent 
functionality built into a vulnerabili ty scanner.  In addition , request evidence of previous 
automated asset discovery scans and pay attention to the date/time stamp and their 
scope . 
Note, while an automated method of asset discovery should be used at least fortnightly, 
system owners may elect to align the frequency of asset discovery scans to more 
frequent timeframes used for vulnerability scans (such as daily or weekly) in order to 
perform both activities at the same time for optimal effect.  
Finally , in addition to identifying assets for follo w-on vulnerability scanning activities, 
automated  asset discovery can also be used to identify any unauthorised assets that may 
have been connected to a system between scheduled scans. If unknown assets are 
identified as part of asset discovery scans, they  should be immediately investigated and 
treated as suspicious until confirmed otherwise.   
 17 
A vulnerability scanner 
with an up -to-date 
vulnerability database is 
used for vulnerability 
scanning activities.  Ask for a demonstration of a vulnerability scan . In addition , request evidence of the 
date/time stamp of when the vulnerability database used for the scan was last updated. 
Ideally, this should be within 24 hours of the vulnerability scan taking place.  
A vulnerability scanner 
is used at least daily  to 
ident ify missing patches  
or updates  for security 
vulnerabilities in 
operating systems of 
internet -facing services.  Ask for a demonstration of a vulnerability scan . In addition , request evidence of previous 
vulnerability scans and pay attention to the date/time stamp and scope of event logs. 
Request evidence of previous vulnerability scans and pay attention to the date/time 
stamp and scope of event logs. 
A vulnerability scanner 
is used at least 
fortnightly to identify 
missing patches or 
updates for security 
vulnerabilities in 
operating systems of 
workstations, servers 
and network devices.  Ask for a demonstration of a vulnerability scan . In addition , request evidence of previous 
vulnerability scans and pay attention to the date/time stamp and scope of event logs. 
Request evidence of previous vulnerability scans and pay attention to the date/time 
stamp and scope of event logs. 
Patches, updates or 
vendor mitigations for 
security vulnerabilities 
in operating systems of 
internet -facing services 
are applied within two 
weeks of release , or 
within 48 hours if an 
exploit exist s. Network -based vulnerability scanners can be  used to identify operating systems , their 
versions  and install dates . This can then be reviewed alongside the release date of 
patches to determine wh ether the timeframe has been met. The use of these tools can 
quickly determine patches that have been applied,  which can then be compared to patch 
release dates . There are several free  tools available to support the assessment of this 
control , including th e ACSC’s E8MVT,  Nessus Essentials, Nexpose Community Edition, 
OpenVAS and Qualys Community Edition.  There are also several paid tools available. In 
choosing a tool to use, make sure that it has been thoroughly tested beforehand to 
ensure it is fit -for-purp ose. 
If using Windows Server Update Services (WSUS) for the assessment of this control, it is 
important to consider that WSUS does not  necessarily report accurate patch levels. 
Specifically, WSUS has been known to report patches or updates that have been 
deployed but not whether they were successfully applied, stuck and if the machine was 
rebooted (if required ). 
Request WMIC or PowerShell be used to generate a list of hotfixes  and the date  that 
they were  applied to an operating system. This can then be co mpared to available 
patches, especially those that are currently being exploited, to determine whether they 
have been applied or not.   
 18 
Patches, updates or 
vendor mitigations for 
security vulnerabilities 
in operating systems of 
workstations , servers  
and net work devices  are 
applied within one 
month of release.  Network -based vulnerability scanners can be  used to identify operating systems , their 
versions  and install date . This can then be reviewed alongside the release date of the 
patches to determine whether the timeframe has been met.  The use of these tools can 
quickly determine patches that have been applied, which can then be compared to the 
patch release date . There are several free  tools available to support the assessment of 
this control , including the A CSC’s E8MVT,  Nessus Essentials, Nexpose Community 
Edition, OpenVAS and Qualys Community Edition.  There are also several paid tools 
available. In choosing a tool to use, make sure that it has been thoroughly tested 
beforehand to ensure it is fit -for-purpose . 
If using WSUS for the assessment of this control, it is important to consider that WSUS 
does not  necessarily report accurate patch levels. Specifically, WSUS has been known to 
report patches or updates that have been deployed but not whether they were 
successfully applied, stuck and if the machine was re booted (if required ). 
Request WMIC or PowerShell be used to generate a list of hotfixes  and the date  that 
they were  applied to an operating system. This can then be compared to available 
patches, especia lly those that are currently being exploited, to determine whether they 
have been applied or not.  
Operating systems that 
are no longer supported 
by vendors are replaced.  Network -based vulnerability scanners can be  used to identify operating systems and 
their versions. The use of these tools can quickly determin e operating system versions 
which can then be checked against the list of supported operating systems from vendors.  
For Microsoft Windows workstations and servers, the ‘winver’ command can be run t o 
determine the version of the operating system. Request a screenshot of the output of 
running the ‘winver’ command for servers and workstations (assuming a Standard 
Operating Environment  is used for workstations).  This version can then be checked 
against Microsoft release information to determine whether it is a supported version or 
not. 
 
Multi -factor authentication  
Context  
Multi -factor authentication is one of the most effective controls an organisation can implement to prevent adversar ies 
from gaining a ccess to a system , service  or application . When implemented correctly, multi -factor authentication can 
also make it significantly more difficult for adversar ies to steal legitimate credentials to facilitate further mal icious 
activities . 
Multi -factor authen tication should be implemented for remote access solutions, users performing privileged actions 
and users accessing important (sensitive or high -availability) data repositories. Using multi -factor authentication 
provides a secure authentication mechanism t hat is not as sus ceptible to brute force attacks, such as traditional single -
factor authentication methods based on memorised secrets  (e.g.  personal identification numbers ( PINs ), passwords and  
passphrases ). 
At this maturity level, any two or more authenti cation methods can be used as long as they are not  of the same class 
(e.g. something users know, something users have or something users are). There is no requirement that one factor  
 19 
must be a memorised secret . Biometrics and Trusted Signals  are also acceptable as an authentication  method at this 
maturity level.  
Note, while any two or more authentication me thods can be used at Maturity Level One, organisations may still choose 
to implement multi -factor authentication solutions, such as those that include something the user has or are phishing -
resistant, if they intend t o eventually implement requirements for  Maturity Level Two or Maturity Level Three.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Asse ssment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Multi -factor authentication is 
used by an organisation ’s 
users if they authenticate to 
their organisation’s internet -
facing services.  Attempt to logon to  internet -facing services that staff  access.  Typically, the  logon 
screen will show a request for two or more authentication factors, such as a password 
and a one -time PIN. Note, i n some cases a service may request the second 
authentication factor after the first authentication factor has been validated.  
Organisati ons might  only share their primary login portal and may not disclose any 
other portals that may not have MFA in place. Assessors should undertake activities to 
determine if any additional authentication portals are exposed to the internet . 
Multi -factor au thentication is 
used by an organisation’s 
users if they authenticate to 
third -party internet -facing 
services that process, store 
or communicate their 
organisation ’s sensitive data.  Attempt to logon to third -party  internet -facing services that staff  access.  In cases 
where multi -factor authentication is not used, confirm that the vendor or service 
provider does not  offer that functionality.  
Multi -factor authentication 
(where available) is used by 
an organisation’s users if they 
authenticate to third -party 
internet -facing services that 
process, store or 
communicate their 
organisation ’s non -sensitive 
data.  Attempt to logon to third -party  internet -facing services that staff  access. In cases 
where multi -factor authentication is not used, confirm that the vendor o r service 
provider does not  offer that functionality.  
Multi -factor authentication is 
enabled by default for non -
organisational users (but 
users can choose to opt out) 
if they authenticate to an 
organisation’s internet -facing 
services.  Attempt to logon to  internet -facing services that customers/citizens access . Discuss 
whether multi -factor authentication is setup as part of account creation (opt -out) or 
whether customers/citizens  need to set it up themselves after initial account creation 
(opt -in). 
  
 20 
Regula r backups  
Context  
Backup and retention frequencies should b e defined by the system owner  in accordance with  their organisation’s  
business continuity  and disaster recovery  requirements.  In doing so, i t is important that restoration of systems and data 
from backups be  tested as part of regular (at least annual) disaster recovery exercises and not left to after the first 
major security incident is experienced.  
At this maturity level, it is important that unprivileged users cannot access the backups of any othe r users – although it 
is not necessarily a problem if they are able to access their own backups. It is worth noting, at this maturity level , that  
privileged accounts may still be able to access the backups of any user.  
While unprivileged accounts can acces s (i.e. read) their own backups, it is important that they do not have the ability to 
modify or delete those backups. This requirement exists as any ransomware running with the privileges of an 
unprivileged user should be blocked from overwriting  or deleti ng backups. Note, adversaries escalating privileges to 
privileged accounts, or backup administrator  account s, to overwrite backups are addressed at higher maturity levels.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Backups of important 
data, software and 
configuration settings 
are performed and 
retained with a 
frequency and retention 
timeframe in 
accordance with 
business continuity 
requirements.  Discuss backup and retention frequencies specified for the system. Request a copy of the 
business continuity plan and disaster recovery  plan to check that th e frequency and 
retention periods have been documented.  
Backups of important 
data, software and 
configuration settings 
are synchronised to 
enable restoration to a 
common point in time.  It is important that any backup activities are synchronised to enable restoration to a 
common point in time.  For example, if important data stores are being backed up out of 
sync to software and configuration settings then it will hamper restoration  efforts and data 
will be lost.  
Backups of important 
data, software and 
conf iguration settings 
are retained in a  secure 
and resilient manner.  Check what efforts have been made to ensure that backup processes and procedures are 
secure and resilient. For example, are backups encrypted and how quickly can they  be used 
to recover from  ICT equipment failure?   
 21 
Restoration of 
important data, 
software and 
configuration settings 
from backups to a 
common point in time is 
tested as part of disaster 
recovery exercises.  Discuss if any disaster recovery exercises  have been conducted  for the syst em, how often 
these are conducted, when the last exercise was conducted and if partial or full restoration 
of the system (including important data , software and configuration settings ) was exercised. 
Ideally, some form of after -action review or post -exerci se report should be available to 
demonstrate what disaster recovery processes and procedures where exercised and any 
lessons that were learnt, such as the coordination of restoration activities across different 
business areas  (if applicable).  
Note that bus iness -as-usual recovery of user files is not sufficient. The intent of this control 
is the restoration of a significant component  of a system as part of a scheduled exercise.  
Unprivileged accounts 
cannot access backups 
belonging to other 
accounts.  Review the backup solution and Active Directory security groups to determine who has 
access to backups.  
Check  whether unprivileged accounts have the ability to access all backups or just  their own 
backups. If backups are stored on network shares, request a demo nstration of  effective 
access permissions to show  that a n unprivileged user  account is incapable of  accessing 
backups beyond their own . 
Unprivileged accounts  
are prevented from 
modifying and deleting 
backups.  Check  whether unprivileged accounts have the a bility to modify or delete their own 
backups. If backups are stored on network shares, request a demonstration  of effective 
access permissions to show  that an  unprivileged user  account is incapable of modifying or 
deleting their backups  – or takin g ownersh ip of content to change permissions.  
 
Maturity Level Two  
The focus of this maturity level is adversaries operating with a modest step -up in capability from the previous maturity 
level. These adversaries are willing to invest more time in a target and, per haps more importantly, in the effectiveness 
of their tools. For example, these adversaries will likely employ  well-known tradecraft to better attempt to bypass 
controls implemented by a target and evade detection. This includes actively targeting credentia ls using phishing and 
employing technical and social engineering techniques to circumvent weak er methods of  multi -factor authentication.  
Generally, adversaries are likely to be more selective in their targeting but still somewhat conservative in the time, 
money and effort they may invest in a target. Adversaries will likely invest time to ensure their phishing is effective and 
employ common social engineering techniques to  trick users into weakening the security of a system and execut ing 
malicious code, for  example, via a Microsoft Office macro.  
Adversaries will also often seek to compromise user accounts. If successful, they may seek to exploit privileges 
associated with th ese accounts or escalate privileges to higher levels. Depending on the ir intent, adve rsaries may also 
seek to steal or destroy data (including backups) or make data  otherwise unavailable through various denial -of-service 
techniques . 
The guidance below outlines the requirements to be assessed in addition to the requirements of the previous maturity 
level.  In doing so, assessments against Maturity Level Two should focus on the delta between Maturity Level One and 
Maturity Level Two.   
 22 
Application control  
Context  
For Maturity Level Two, application control requires the use of a dedicated applica tion control solution. This may be 
one of the in -built solutions from Microsoft (e.g. AppLocker or Windows Defender Application Control) or it may be a 
third -party solution (e.g. AirLock Digital’s AirLock, Ivanti’s Device and Application Control, Trend Mic ro Endpoint 
Application Control  or VMWare Carbon Black App Control).  
The majority of application control solutions will have a form of logging or auditing mode. As such, event logs for 
application control solutions should be collected and stored  in case th ere is a cyber security incident and they are 
required for forensic or incident response purposes. Often, the lack of sufficient logging can impact the ability to 
determine the extent of a cyber security incident , how it occurred and what security vulnerab ilities need to be 
mitigated.  
Assessment Guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance  (ordered by effectiveness)  
Application control is 
implemented on 
workstations and internet -
facing servers . Check whether a dedicated application control solution has been implemented on all 
workstations and internet -facing servers.  
Application control r estrict s 
the execution of executables, 
software libraries, scripts, 
installers, compiled HTML, 
HTML applications and 
control panel applets  to an 
organisation -approved set . Due to the complexity of application control rulesets, the best way to assess applic ation 
control implementations is to attempt to write to and execute from all locations 
accessible to a user on the file system. There are several  free tools available to support 
the assessment of this control , including the ACSC’s  ACVT , AirLock Digital’s A pplication 
Whitelist Auditor and CyberArk’s Evasor.  There are also several  paid tools available. In 
choosing a tool to use, make sure that it has been thoroughly tested beforehand to 
ensure it is fit -for-purpose.  
If publisher -based  rules are used for the system , check that wildcards are not  used for 
publisher or product names.  In addition, if path -based rules are used for the system, 
check that users don’t have write access to any paths specified in application control 
ruleset s. 
Finally , if a version of an application has been trojanised, and would otherwise be 
allowed to execute due to an existing publisher or hash rule, a hash -based deny rule 
should be implemented for that version. Tools used for assessments  are unlikely to 
detect th is scenario, therefore , it will need to be identified on a case -by-case basis . 
Allowed and blocked 
execution  event s on 
workstations and internet -
facing servers are logged.  Ask whether logging is available for the application control solution used and request 
screenshots of any logging output that shows records of executable content that was 
allowed to execute as well as executable content t hat was blocked from executing.  
  
 23 
Patch applications  
Context  
At this maturity level , the timeframe for patching security vulnerabilities in internet -facing systems is decreased from 
one month to two weeks. In addition, this maturity level introduces  patching timeframes for additional applications, 
and an increase in associated vulnerabilit y scanning frequencies  and scope.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
A vulnerability scanner  is 
used at least weekly  to 
identify missing patches or 
updates for security 
vulnerabilities in office 
productivity suites, web 
browsers  and their 
extensions , email clients, PDF 
software , and security 
products.  Use the guidance provided in  Maturity Level O ne of this guide and apply the Maturity 
Level Two timeframes.  
A vulnerability scanner is 
used at least fortnightly to 
identify missing patches or 
updates for security 
vulnerabilities in other 
applications.  Use the guidance provided in  Maturity Level One o f this guide but apply  it to other 
applications using the identified timeframes.  
Patches, updates or vendor 
mitigations for security 
vulnerabilities in office 
productivity suites, web 
browsers  and their 
extensions , email clients, PDF 
software , and securit y 
products are applied within 
two weeks  of release.  Use the guidance provided in Maturity Level One of this guide and apply the Maturity 
Level Two timeframes.  
Patches, updates or vendor 
mitigations for security 
vulnerabilities in other 
applications are ap plied 
within one month of release.  Use the guidance provided in Maturity Level One of this guide but apply it to other 
applications using the identified timeframes.   
 24 
Configure Microsoft Office macro settings  
Context  
At this maturity level , an additional  requirement is introduced relat ing to the  use of the  Attack Surface Reduction (ASR) 
rule ‘Block Win32 API calls from Office macros’. This ASR rule prevents Microsoft Office macros from calling Win32 APIs, 
which adversaries can exploit to  run malicious code t hat is more powerful than the actions they can perform using the 
Microsoft Office VBA macro language itself . 
Event l ogs for Microsoft Office macro execution  event s should be collected and stored in case there is a  cyber security 
incident and they  are requi red for forensic o r incident response purposes . Often, the lack of sufficient logging can 
impact the ability to determine the extent of a cyber security incident , how it occurred and what security vulnerabilities 
need to be mitigated.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Microsoft Office macro s are 
blocked from making Win32 
API calls.  The ACSC’s E8MVT can assist in determining the implementation of this control  as it 
includes  a test file that contains a Microsoft  Office macro designed to test this ASR rule . 
Note, this test will need to be condu cted with an account that is allowed to execute 
Microsoft Office macros.  
Within the RS oP report, look for the ‘Configure Attack Surface Reduction rules’ setting 
at ‘Computer Configuration \Policies \Administrative Templates \Windows Components \ 
Microsoft  Defender Antivirus \Microsoft  Defender Exploit Guar d\Attack Surface 
Reduction \’. It should be enabled and include an entry of ‘92E97FA1 -2EDF -4476 -BDD6 -
9DD0B4DDDC7B’ with a value of 1 (i.e. enabled).  
If a third -party solution is being used, discuss if the third-party  solution has similar 
functionality  to the ASR rule . If so, request evidence as required.  
Allowed and blocked 
Microsoft Office macro 
execution  event s are logged.  Within Trust Center, check whether ‘Enable Trust Center Logging ’ has been enabled 
within the ‘Message Bar ’ section.  
Request screenshots of any logging output that shows records of Microsoft Office 
macros that were allowed to execute and Microsoft Office macros that were blocked 
from executing.  
 
User application hardening  
Context  
This mat urity level requires the implementation of several  ASR rules to prevent adversaries from using Microsoft Office 
applications to create child processes that can be used to download and run malicious code, write malicious code to 
disk or inject malicious cod e into other processes. In addition, the ASR rule ‘Block Adobe Reader from creating child  
 25 
processes’ should  be implemented to prevent adversaries from using Adobe Reader to create child processes which can 
be used to download and run malicious code.  
Advers aries often attempt to exploit security vulnerabilities in Microsoft Office through its support for Object Linking 
and Embedding (OLE) packages. This maturity level requires Microsoft Office to be  configured to prevent activation of 
these OLE packages.  
The implementation of ACSC or vendor hardening guidance can assist in reducing the attack surface of applications. 
This is particularly important for key applications that are commonly targeted by adversaries such as web browsers, 
Microsoft Office and Portabl e Document Format ( PDF) software (e.g. Adobe Reader). In cases where ACSC hardening 
guidance conflicts with vendor hardening guidance, consider ation should be given to  what the hardening guidance is 
attempting to achieve.  
Event l ogs for blocked attempts to  execute PowerShell scripts should be collected and stored in case there is a cyber 
security incident and they are required for forensic or incident response purposes. This should not be confused with 
‘module logging’, ‘script block logging’ and ‘transcrip tion’ functionality of PowerShell, which while recommended for 
good cyber hygiene, are not within scope of Essential Eight assessments . Often, the lack of sufficient logging can impact 
the ability to determine the extent of a cyber security incident, how i t occurred and what security vulnerabilities need 
to be mitigated.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly co nsidered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Microsoft Office is blocked 
from creating child 
processes.  The ACSC’s E8MVT can assist in determining the implementation of this control  as it 
includes test files that contain Microsoft Offi ce macros designed to test each ASR rule.  
Note, this test will need to be conduct ed with an account that is allowed to execute 
Microsoft Office macros.  
Within the RSo P report, look for the ‘Configure Attack Surface Reduction rules’ setting 
at ‘Computer C onfiguration \Policies \Administrative Templates \Windows 
Components \Microsoft  Defender Antivirus \Microsoft  Defender Exploit Guar d\Attack 
Surface Reduction \’. It should be enabled  and include the entries of ‘D4F940AB -401B -
4EFC -AADC -AD5F3C50688A’ and ‘26190899 -1602 -49E8 -8B27 -EB1D0A1CE869’ with a 
value of 1 (i.e. enabled).  
Microsoft Office is blocked 
from creating executable 
content.  The ACSC’s E8MVT can assist in determining the implementation of this control as it 
includes test files that contain Microsoft Of fice macros designed to test each ASR rule. 
Note, this test will need to be conduct ed with an account that is allowed to execute 
Microsoft Office macros.  
Within the RSo P report, look for the ‘Configure Attack Surface Reduction rules’ setting 
at ‘Computer  Configuration \Policies \Administrative Templates \Windows 
Components \Microsoft  Defender Antivirus \Microsoft  Defender Exploit Gu ard\Attack 
Surface Reduction \’. It should be enabled and include the entries of ‘3B576869 -A4EC -
4529 -8536 -B80A7769E899’ and ‘BE9BA2 D9-53EA -4CDC -84E5 -9B1EEEE46550’ with a 
value of 1 (i.e. enabled).   
 26 
Microsoft Office is blocked 
from injecting code into 
other processes.  The ACSC’s E8MVT can assist in determining the implementation of this control as it 
includes a test file that contains a Microsoft Office macro designed to test this ASR rule. 
Note, this test will need to be conducted with an account that is allowed to execute 
Microsoft Office macros.  
Within the RSo P report, look for the ‘Configure Attack Surface Reduction rules’ setting  
at ‘Computer Configuration \Policies \Administrative Templates \Windows 
Components \Microsoft  Defender Antivirus \Microsoft  Defender Exploit Gu ard\Attack 
Surface Reduction \’. It should be enabled and include the entry of ‘75668C1F -73B5 -
4CF0 -BB93 -3ECF5CB7CC84’ with a value of 1 (i.e. enabled).  
Microsoft Office is 
configured to prevent 
activation of OLE packages.  The ACSC’s E8MVT can assist in determining the implementation of this control.  
Within the RSoP report, look for the ‘PackagerPrompt’ registry setting  at 
‘HKEY_CURRENT_USER \Software \Microsoft \Office \<version> \<Microsoft Office 
Application> \Security \’. It should exist and be set to ‘REG_DWORD 0x00000002 (2)’.  
Microsoft Office security 
settings cannot be changed 
by users.  The ACSC’s E8MVT can assist in d etermining the implementation of this control.  
Within the RSoP report, look for security -related group policy settings that have been 
defined for Microsoft Office. Alternatively, r equest a screenshot of  the security settings 
of each Microsoft Office appl ication  present on the system. Identify if settings are 
greyed out , thereby indicating they cannot be changed by users.  
PDF software is blocked 
from creating child 
processes.  The ACSC’s E8MVT can assist in determining the implementation of this control.  
This attack surface reduction rule applies only to Adobe PDF software. As such, o pen 
any Adobe PDF software that exists on the system, such as  Adobe Acrobat, and use 
File-Open to browse to a location with an exe, such as the Windows directory, change 
the view to show all files, right click on an executable such as calc.exe and select Open. 
The ASR rule if implemented will block this action.  
Within the RSoP report, look for the ‘Configure Attack Surface Reduction rules’ setting 
at ‘Computer Configuration \Policies \Administrative Templates \Windows 
Components \Microsoft Defender Antivirus \Microsoft Defender Exploit Gu ard\Attack 
Surface Reduction \’. It should be enabled and include the entry of ‘7674BA52 -37EB -
4A4F -A9A1 -F0F9A1619A2C’ with a value of 1 (i.e. enab led).  
PDF software security 
settings cannot be changed 
by users.  Within the RSoP report, look for security -related group policy settings that have been 
defined for PDF software. Alternatively, r equest a screenshot of  the security settings of 
any PDF softw are present on the system . Identify if settings are greyed out , thereby 
indicating they cannot be changed by users.   
 27 
ACSC or vendor hardening 
guidance for web browsers, 
Microsoft Office and PDF 
software is implemented.  Generally, hardening guidance can be configured via group policy setting templates 
that are made available by vendors. This wil l be included as part of any RSo P reports 
that are provided . 
ACSC hardening guidance for Microsoft Office is available within the Hardening 
Microsoft 365, Office 2021, Office 2019 and Office 2016  publication.  
Microsoft hardening guidance is available from their Microsoft Security Baselines Blog . 
Blocked PowerShell script 
execution  event s are logged.  The ACSC’s E8MVT can assist in determining the implementation of this control.  
If an application control solution has been suit ably configured, it should already 
capture any blocked attempts to execute PowerShell scripts. If not, discuss what other 
logging mechanisms are in place to capture any blocked attempts to execute 
PowerShell scripts on the system and seek supporting eviden ce. 
 
Restrict administrative privileges  
Context  
To avoid users collecting privileges and access as they change roles  throughout an organisation , and to enforce the 
principle of least -privileged role-based access control, privileged users should be require d to regularly revalidate their 
requirement for privileged access. As such, p rivileged accounts that have not been used within 45 days strongly indicate 
that the y are  no longer required. Rather than account s remaining active, and a possible target for adve rsaries to 
exploit , inactive accounts should be disabled on a regular basis.  
For Maturity Level Two, privileged operating environments must not be virtualised within unprivileged operating 
environments. This constraint allows for three implementation scena rios:  
 physically separate operating environments  
 an unprivileged operating environment virtualised within a privileged operating environment  
 both a privileged and unprivileged operating environment virtualised within a physical host’s  hardened operating 
environment.  
Jump servers play an important role as a centralised logging and tool enforcement point for administrative activities , 
even when privileged operating environments are used.  
The use of a common local administrator password for every workstation a nd server is a common approach in poorly -
secured networks due to its ease of  use. A marginally more secure  approach is using passwords that are a combination 
of a fixed component and a dynamic component (e.g. including a unique asset identifier ). While the  latter may appear 
to be secure, if adversaries are able to compromise one or more local administrator passwords they may be able to 
discern a pattern. Ideally, an approach that ensures local administrator and service accounts are unique, unpredictable 
and managed should be used. For example, Microsoft’s Local Administrator Password Solution . 
Event l ogs relating to the use of , and change s to, privileged accounts  should be collected and stored  in case there is a 
cyber security incident and they are required for forensic or incident response purposes. Often, the lack of sufficient 
logging can impact the ability to determine the extent of a cyber security incident, how it occurred and what security 
vulnerabilities need to be mitigated.   
 28 
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by eac h method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Privileged access to systems 
and applications is 
automatically disabled after 
12 months unless 
revalidated.  Check whether an account expiry date is s et in A ctive Directory  under account profile s 
and whether a mechanism exists to automatically disable accounts after 12 months 
unless revalidated beforehand . Ask for a screenshot of the output of the following 
PowerShell commands that check for accounts with either n o expiration date or have 
an expiration date that exceeds 12 months:  
Get-ADUser -Filter {(admincount -eq 1) -and (enabled -eq $true)} -Properties 
AccountExpirationDate | Where -Object {$_.AccountExpirationDate -like “” | Select 
@{n= ‘Username ’; e={$_.SamAcco untName}}, @{n= ‘Account Expiration Date ’; 
e={$_.AccountExpirationDate}}, @{n= ‘Enabled ’; e={$_.Enabled}}  
Get-ADUser -Filter {(admincount -eq 1) -and (enabled -eq $true)} -Properties 
AccountExpirationDate | Where -Object {$_.AccountExpirationDate -gt (Get -
Date).AddMonths(12)} | Select @{n= ‘Username ’; e={$_.SamAccountName}}, 
@{n= ‘Account Expiration Date ’; e={$_.AccountExpirationDate}}, @{n= ‘Enabled ’; 
e={$_.Enabled}}  
Privileged access to systems 
and applications is 
automatically disabled after 
45 days of inacti vity.  Microsoft provides guidance on the use of Power Shell  to identify inactive accounts 
based on when they were last used to logon to a system . Ask for a screenshot of the 
output of the following  PowerShell command that  check s for inactive accounts to 
demonstrate that this activity takes place on a daily b asis: 
Get-ADUser -Filter {(admincount -eq 1) -and (enabled -eq $true)} -Properties 
LastLogonDate | Where -Object {$_.LastLogonDate -lt (Get -Date).AddDays( -45) -
and$_.LastLogonDate -ne $null} | Select @{n= ‘Username ’; e={$_.samaccountname}}, 
@{n= ‘Last Logon D ate’; e={$_.LastLogonDate}}, @{n= ‘Enabled ’; e={$_.enabled}}  
Privileged operating 
environments are not 
virtualised within 
unprivileged operating 
environments.  Discuss how privileged operating environments  have been implemented  for the 
management of the sys tem. It should align to one of the implementation scenarios 
within the context section of this mitigation strategy and be covered within the security 
documentation for the system.  
Administrative activities are 
conducted through jump 
servers.  Tools such as  BloodHound  can be used to determine the path administrators are using 
to log in and which servers are jump servers.  
Request a system administ rator demonstrate creating and removing a test user 
account to confirm the use of jump servers.  
Discuss the network structure for the system to determine if jump servers have been 
implemented for administrative activities. This should be visible in netwo rk diagrams 
for the system.   
 29 
Credentials for local 
administrator accounts and 
service accounts are long, 
unique, unpredictable and 
managed.  Discuss how local administrator and service accounts are managed. Confirm if  
Microsoft’s  Local Administrator Password Solution , or another suitable approach that 
results in long, unique and unpredictable passwords for each workstation and server , is 
used . 
To check if all c omputer s have LAPS configured, run the following PowerShell 
command s and compare the output : 
Get-ADComputer -Filter {ms -Mcs-AdmPwdExpirationTime -like “*”} -Properties ms -Mcs-
AdmPwdExpirationTime | measure  
Get-ADComputer -Filter {Ena bled -eq $true} | measure  
Discuss how group Managed Service Accounts  (gMSAs) are managed. gMSAs are 
dom ain accounts that use 240 -byte random ly generated complex passwords. gMSAs 
shift password management to the Windows operating system, which ch anges the 
password every 30 days . 
Privileged access  events are 
logged.  Within the RSo P report, look for the ‘Audi t Sensitive Privilege Use’ setting at ‘Computer 
Configuration \Policies \Windows Settings \Security Settings \Advanced Audit Policy 
Configuration \Audit Policies \Privilege Use \’. It should be enabled with a value of 
‘Success and Failure’.  
In addition , look for the ‘Audit Logon’, ‘Audit Other Logon/Logoff Events’ and ‘Audit 
Special Logon’ settings at ‘Computer Configuration \Policies \Windows Settings \Security 
Settings \Advanced Audit Policy Configuration \Audit Policies \Logon/Logoff’. They 
should be enabled with a v alue of ‘Success and Failure’.  
Finally , look for the ‘Audit Logoff’ setting at ‘Computer Configuration \Policies \ 
Windows Settings \Security Settings \Advanced Audit Policy Configuration \Audit 
Policies \Logon/Logoff’. It should be ena bled with a value of ‘Succ ess’.  
Privileged account  and group 
management event s are 
logged.  Using the specific event IDs (available from Microsoft Docs), check whether changes to 
privileged accounts and groups are logged in event viewer or a SIEM tool.  
More information on s ecurity operations for privileged accounts in Active Directory , 
including specific event IDs for this control, can be found at Microsoft Docs . 
Within the RSo P report, look for the ‘Audit Computer Account Management’ and ‘Audit 
User Account Management’ settings at ‘Computer Configuration \Policies \Windows 
Settings \Security Settings \Advanced Audit Policy Configuration \Audi t Policies \Account 
Management \’. They should be enabled with a value of ‘Success and Failure’.  
In addition, look for the ‘Audit Security Group Management’ setting at ‘Computer 
Configuration \Policies \Windows Settings \Security Settings \Advanced Audit Policy 
Configuration \Audit  Policies \Account Management \’. It should be enabled with a value 
of ‘Success and Failure’.  
  
 30 
Patch operating systems  
Context  
At this maturity level , the timeframe for patching security vulnerabilities in operating systems i s decreased f rom on e 
month to two weeks. In addition, this maturity level requires weekly vulnerability scanning.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by  each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
A vulnerability scanner is 
used at least weekly  to 
identify missing patches or 
updates for security 
vulnerabilities in operating 
systems of workstations, 
servers and network devices.  Use the guidance provided in  Maturity Level One of this guide and apply the Maturity 
Level Two timeframes.  
Patches, updates or vendor 
mitigations for security 
vulnerabilities in operating 
systems of workstations, 
servers and net work devices  
are applied within two weeks  
of release.  Use the guidance provided in Maturity Level One of this guide and apply the Maturity 
Level Two timeframes.  
 
Multi -factor authentication  
Context  
At this maturity level, an additional  requirement for  all privileged users logging onto systems , both l ocally and remotely , 
to use multi -factor authentication  is introduced . In addition, t he authentication methods that can be used, and in what 
combination, are restricted  to avoid weaker implementations . Specific ally, acceptable multi -factor authentication  
implementations  include:  
 something users have (i.e. look -up secret, out -of-band device, single -factor one-time PIN ( OTP) devices, single -
factor cryptographic software or single factor cryptographic device) in ad dition to something users know (i.e. a 
memorised secret)  
 something users have that is unlocked by something users know or are (i.e. multi -factor OTP device , multi-factor 
cryptographic software  or multi -factor cryptographic device ). 
Biometrics are not accep table at this maturity level. This is due to biometric characteristics  not being  secrets, biometric 
matching being  probabilistic rather than deterministic and there being  a reliance on the security of biometric capture 
software installed on device s. Howeve r, biometrics can be used to unlock another authentication factor (e.g. a 
certificate stored in a Trusted Platform Module or an OTP generator app  on a smartphone ). Trusted Signals  are also not  
 31 
acceptable at this maturity level . This is due to issues associated with  placing trust in the signal itself, which can be 
targeted  and spoofed  by adversar ies. 
While n ot yet excluded  at this maturity level, organisations may want to avoiding authentication methods increasingly 
being subject to MFA fatigue or social engineering attempts by adversaries, such as push notifications  and SMS codes . 
Event l ogs for multi -factor  authentication events  should be collected and stored in case they are required to support 
forensic or incident response activities following a cyber security incident. The lack of sufficient logging can impact the 
ability to determine the extent of a cybe r security incident , how it occurred and what security vulnerabilities need to be 
mitigated.  
Note, at this maturity level organisations may choose to implement multi -factor authentication solutions that are  
phishing -resistant , such as security keys or smar tcards,  if they intend to eventually implement requirements for 
Maturity Level Three.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Multi -factor authentication 
is used to authenticate 
privileged users of systems.  Observe an administrator authenticate to a system  to check whether they are required 
to us e MFA. Alternatively, r equest evidence of the logon screen for a privileged user. 
The logon screen should show multiple  authentication methods being requested.  
Multi -factor authentication 
uses either: something users 
have and something users 
know, or some thing users 
have that is unlocked by 
something users know or 
are. Discuss the implementation of multi -factor authentication for users. Note, m ultiple 
different forms of multi -factor authentication may exist depending on the number of 
different  systems and internet -facing services  that users authenticate to. For example, 
multi -factor authentication for administration of cloud services might involve a 
different implementation  to multi -factor authentication for administration of on -
premises services.  Furthermo re, not all third -party internet -facing services may offer 
the same multi -factor authentication implementation.  
Discussions should  also include distinguishing between multi -step authentication and 
multi -factor authentication, as well as different levels of  security provided by different 
multi -factor authentication implementations . For example, a security key or smartcard 
is more secure than a  hardware  OTP device which is more secure than a n OTP mobile 
app which is more secure than a push notification or SMS  code sent to a smartphone . 
Successful and unsuccessful 
multi -factor authentication  
event s are logged.  Within the RSo P report, look for the ‘Audit Logon’ and ‘Audit Special Logon’ settings at 
‘Computer Configuration \Policies \Windows Settings \Security Sett ings\Advanced Audit 
Policy Configuration \Audit Policies \Logon/Logoff \’. They should  be enabled with a 
value of ‘Success and Failure’.  
For certain MFA implementations  the above guidance may not be applicable. In these 
instances d iscuss whether logging is available for all systems that users authenticate to  
and seek evidence that such logging is in place . 
If an administrator logon was observed (per the first control in this table), request 
recent event logs to check that there is a corresponding event log e ntry.   
 32 
Regular backups  
Context  
At this maturity level, privileged accounts (with the ex ception of backup administrator accounts ) are limited to only 
accessing their own backups, and should  not be able to modify and  delete backups.  
It is important that back up administrator accounts (as well as user accounts in general) are provisioned following the 
principles of least privilege and separation of duties. As such, b ackup administrator accounts should only be given to a 
small group of trusted administrators and  a separate group should be setup for the purpose of restoring backups. 
Excessive permissions for accounts increases the chance that they will be compromised. Should this occur for these 
accounts, adversaries performing ransomware attacks  can easily encryp t or delete  all backups.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ord ered by effectiveness)  
Privileged accounts 
(excluding backup 
administrator  account s) 
cannot access backups 
belonging to other accounts.  Use the guidance provided in  Maturity Level One of this guide and apply the Maturity 
Level Two access control requireme nts. Specifically, privileged accounts should  only  be 
able to access their own  backups  (except for  backup administrator  account s). 
Active Directory queries and tools such as BloodHound  can help to identify privileged 
accounts including backup administrator  account s. 
Privileged accounts 
(excluding backup 
administrator accounts) are 
prevented from modifying 
and deleting backups.  Use the guidance pr ovided in  Maturity Level One of this guide and apply the Maturity 
Level Two access control requirements.  Specifically, privileged accounts shoul d no 
longer be able to modify and  delete backups. Such activities should be restricted to 
backup administrator  account s. 
Active Directory queries and tools such as BloodHound  can help to identify privileged 
accounts including backup administrator  account s. 
 
Maturity Level Three  
The focus of this maturity level is adversaries who are more adaptive and much less reliant on public tools and 
techniques. These adversaries are able to exploit the opportunities provided by weaknesses in their target’s cyber 
secur ity posture, such as the existence of older operating systems  or inadequate logging and monitoring. Adversaries 
do this to not only extend their access once initial access has been gained to a target, but to evade detection and 
solidify their presence. Adv ersaries make swift use of exploits when they become publicly available as well as other 
tradecraft that can improve their chance of success.  
Generally, at this level, adversaries are more focused on particular targets and, more importantly, are willing an d able 
to invest effort into circumventing particular policy and technical controls implemented by their targets. For example, 
this includes social ly engineering a user to execute  a malicious Microsoft Office macro or circumventing multi -factor 
authenticat ion implementations by stealing authentication token values to impersonate a user. Once a foothold is 
gained on a system, adversaries seek to gain privileged credentials or password hashes, pivot to other parts of a 
network, and cover their tracks. Dependi ng on their intent, adversaries may also destroy all data (including backups).   
 33 
The guidance below outlines the requirements to be assessed in addition to the requirements of the previous maturity 
level.  In doing so, assessments against Maturity Level Three  should focus on the delta between Maturity Level Two and 
Maturity Level Three.  
Application control  
Context  
At this maturity level, the scope of application control is expanded to include drivers and all servers (not just internet -
facing servers). Note, w hile Microsoft AppLocker does not currently support the control of drivers, Windows Defender 
Application Control (WDAC) does. This maturity level also includes the requirement for  centralised logging of allowed 
and blocked execution  event s on workstations a nd servers.  
Microsoft maintains a list of application control bypasses and malicious drivers that have been discovered by security 
researchers and adversaries. Implementing Microsoft’s recommended block rules  and recommended driver block rules  
can help to provide protection from adversaries that would have looked at using these against an otherwise robust 
application control impleme ntation to gain access to  a system.  
When implementing an application control solution, an organisation may develop application control ruleset s but fail to 
ensure they  remains fit -for-purpose by review ing them  on a regular basis . This can lead to  the poten tial failure to 
identify several  scenarios , such as  operating system vendor s chang ing permissions on paths as part of updates  or 
upgrades, exploitable  applications or drivers remain ing approved for a system, vendor code -signing certificates  being  
compromis ed, or system administrators  introduc ing exceptions to ‘get things working’ or troubleshoot  but fail ing to 
remove the  workarounds  afterwards . Each of these scenarios are real, hav ing been observed during assessments , and 
introduce additional security vulne rabilities into a system that may be exploited by adversaries.  
Assessment  guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly consid ered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Application control is 
implemented on 
workstations and servers . It is important to note that at this maturity level the scope has been expanded to 
include all servers. As such, use the guidance provided in Maturity Level Two of this 
guide and apply it to all servers rather than just internet -facing servers.  
Application control restrict s 
the execution of executables, 
software libraries, scripts, 
installers, compiled HTML, 
HTML applications, contr ol 
panel applets and drivers  to 
an organisation -approved 
set. Depending on the application control solution, controlling the  execution of drivers may 
or may not be supported. Request a copy of application control ruleset s to check for 
the inclusion of driv ers. 
Microsoft’s ‘recommended 
block rules ’ are 
implemented.  Request a copy of application control ruleset s. Check whether  Microsoft’s  
recommended block rules  have been specified.   
 34 
Microsoft’s ‘recommended 
driver block rules ’ are 
implemented.  Depending on the application control solution, controlling the execution of drivers may 
or may not be supported. Request a copy of application control ruleset s to check for 
the inclusion of drivers. If drivers are included, check whether  Microsoft’s  
recommended driver block rules  have been specified . 
Application control rulesets 
are validated on an annual 
or more frequent basis.  Discuss how app lication control rulesets are validated and with what frequency. In 
addition, discuss the governance processes and procedures around  making changings 
to application control rulesets and any testing or reviews that are conducted following  
operating system u pgrades  and the addition or removal of applications.  
Allowed and blocked 
execution  event s on 
workstations and servers  are 
centrally  logged . Request the event logs associated with the testing performed using ap plication control 
testing tools.  Discuss wheth er event logs are stored locally or centrally.  
Note, organisations that are comfortable that certain events have a high probability of 
being legitimate may choose to filter them out as part of their centralised collection in 
order to simplify event log ana lysis and reduce storage requirements.  
Event logs are protected 
from unauthorised 
modification and deletion.  Discuss whether a security information and event management (SIEM) solution is 
appropriately configured for the protection of event logs.  
Event l ogs are monitored for 
signs of compromise and 
actioned when any signs of 
compromise  are detected . Discuss whether a SIEM solution supported by security operations centre (SOC) 
analysts  is used to monitor event logs for signs of compromise and respond when any 
signs of compromise are detected . 
 
Patch applications  
Context  
At this maturity level, patches, updates or vendor mitigations must be applied within 48 hours rather than two weeks if 
an exploit exists. In addition, all applications that are no longer s upported by vendors should be removed.  
This requirement can be assessed in a similar way to Maturity Level Two, except that if an exploit exists, patches, 
updates and  vendor mitigations must be applied within 48 hours rather than two weeks.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting an assessment method , the 
quality of the evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.    
 35 
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Patches, updates or vendor 
mitigations for security 
vulnerabilities in office 
productivity suites, web 
browsers  and their 
extensions , email clients, PDF 
software , and security 
products are applied within 
two weeks of release , or 
within 48 hours if an exploit 
exists . Use the relevant guidance provided in Maturity Level One  of this guide and apply the 
Maturity Level Three timeframes  when exploit s exist  for security vulnerabilities . 
Applications  that are no 
longer supported by vendors 
are removed.  Use the releva nt guidance provided in Maturity Level One  of this guide and extend it to 
all applications.  
 
Configure Microsoft Office macro settings  
Context  
Disabling the use of Microsoft Office macros represents an optimal security outcome, however , some users will ha ve a 
business requirement for the ir use. In such  situations, additional controls should be implemented to make the use of 
Microsoft Office macros as secure as possible. This may include either running Microsoft Office macros from within a 
sandboxed environ ment, from an appropriately controlled Trusted Location or ensuring they are  digitally signed by a 
trusted publisher.  
As Microsoft Office allows any files that are opened from a Trusted Location to bypass security checks, it is critical that 
only trusted u sers can write to or modify content in these locations. Under no circumstances should Trusted Locations 
be specified within a user’s profile, such as their desktop  or documents folder s. 
If the ‘Disable all macros except digitally signed macros’ setting is used, this will allow any Microsoft Office macro 
signed by a trusted publisher to execute without prompting the user for permission. However, any Microsoft Office 
macro that is digitally signed by an untrusted publisher will ask users to decide  as to wheth er they would like to allow 
the Microsoft Office macro to execute via the Message Bar or Backstage View. While this prompt can be disabled using 
a group policy setting, the removal of the option to enable Microsoft Office macros via the Backstage View requ ires the 
implementation of an undocumented graphical user interface setting . 
When implementing a digitally signed Microsoft Office macro approach, an organisation may identify a list of trusted 
publishers but fail to review them  on a regular basis for their ongoing suitability. This can create issues when a vendor’s 
code -signing certificate  is compromised. Ideally, an organisation should acquire their own code -signing certificate and 
re-sign any Microsoft Office macros they trust, even if already signed by a third party. While introducing additional 
overhead, this mitigates the risk of trusting compromised third -party code -signing certificates.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.   
 36 
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Only Microsoft Office 
macros running from within 
a sandboxed environment, a 
Trusted Location or that are 
digitally s igned by a trusted 
publisher are allowed to 
execute.  Within the RSoP report, look for the ‘VBA Macro Notification Settings’ setting  at ‘User 
Configuration \Policies \Administration Templates \<Microsoft Office 
Application> \Application Settings \Security \Trust Center \’. It should be enabled and 
configured to ‘Disable all macros without notification’ (if Trusted Locations are used) or 
‘Disable all macros except digitally signed macros’ (if digitally signed Microsoft Office 
macros are used).  
Note, an organisation may choose to use a combination of Trusted Locations and 
digitally signed Microsoft Office macros. However, if only digitally signed  Microsoft 
Office  macros are used then Trusted Locations should be disabled.  
Within each Microsoft Office application, req uest a screenshot showing Trust Center  
macro  settings (File – Options – Trust Center – Trust Center Settings – Macro Settings).  
In addition, request a screenshot showing Trust Center trusted publisher settings (File – 
Options – Trust Center – Trust Center Settings – Trusted Publishers ). 
For the assessment of Microsoft Office macro security, identify what setting is selected 
for ‘macro settings’. The setting should either be set to ‘Disable all macros without 
notification’ (if Trusted Locations are used) or ‘Disable all macros except digitally signed 
macros’ (if digitally signed Microsoft Office macros are used). For the assessmen t of 
Trusted Locations, check whether  the ‘Disable all trusted locations’ option has been 
checked or not. If it has not , then Trust ed Locations are enabled and should be 
individually assessed for their suitability.  
Only privileged users 
responsible for validating 
that Microsoft Office macros 
are free of malicious code 
can write to and modify 
content within Trusted 
Locations.  For each  Trusted Location that is specified, review the effective file system permissions 
for that location (i.e. similar to the assessment for application control at Maturity Level 
One).  If able  to, the assessor should seek to review file system permissions thems elves 
rather than requesting a screenshot.  
Check the total number of users who are in the groups that have the relevant file 
system permissions.  
Microsoft Office macros 
digitally signed by an 
untrusted publisher cannot 
be enabled via the Message 
Bar or Ba ckstage View.  Within the RSo P report, look for the ‘Disable all Trust Bar notifications for security 
issues’ setting at ‘User Configuration \Policies \Administration Templates \Microsoft 
Office <version> \Security Settings \’. It should be enabled.  
In addition,  look for the ‘Disable commands’ setting at ‘User 
Configuration \Policies \Administration Templates \<Microsoft Office 
Application> \Disable Items in User Interface \Custom \’. It should be enabled with a 
value of ‘Enter a command bar ID to disable: 19092’.  
Microsoft Office’s list of 
trusted publishers is 
validated on an annual or 
more frequent basis.  For the assessment of trusted publishers, check which publishers are listed. Ideally, this 
should only be a code -signing certificate belonging to the organisation.  Alternatively, if 
external vendors’ code -signing certificates are listed, discuss how  often these are 
reviewed and what mechanisms are used to identify when/if these need to be removed 
due to compromise by adversaries as part of supply chain attacks.   
 37 
Allowed and blocked 
Microsoft Office macro 
execution  event s are 
centrally  logged . Request the event logs associated with the testing performed using tools that attempt 
to run Microsoft Office macros.  Discuss whether event logs are stored locally or 
centrally.  
Note, organisations that are comfortable that certain events have a high probability of 
being legitimate may choose to filter them out as part of their centralised collection in 
order to simplify event log analysis and reduce storage requirements.  
Event logs are protected 
from unauthorised 
modification and deletion.  Discuss whether a SIEM solution is appropriately configured for the protection of event 
logs.  
Event logs are monitored for 
signs of compromise and 
actioned when any signs of 
compromise  are de tected . Discuss whether a SIEM solution supported by SOC analysts is used to monitor event 
logs for signs of compromise and respond when any signs of compromise are detected.  
 
User application hardening  
Context  
At this maturity level , Internet  Explorer 11  must be disabled or removed from operating system s rather than just 
blocked from accessing the internet  or opening files from the internet . 
.NET Framework 3.5 (including .NET 2.0 and 3.0) is often target ed by  adversaries due to its lack of security functi onality 
when compared to newer versions of the .NET Framework , as well as due to its linkages  to PowerShell 2.0 . Within 
Microsoft Windows there are two separate features relating to the .NET Framework, ‘.NET Framework 3.5 (incl udes 
.NET 2.0 and .NET 3.0)’ and ‘.NET Framework 4.8 Advanced Services’.  
Microsoft ended support for Windows Pow erShell 2.0 in late 2017. At that  time, Microsoft noted that Windows 
PowerShell 2.0 lacked the security functionality of Windows PowerShell 5.0 and higher.  
Constrained Language Mode for PowerShell is designed to prevent PowerShell users (which may include adversaries) 
from running tools that exploit PowerShell or load C omponent Object Model  objects, libraries and classes into a 
PowerShell session.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.    
 38 
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Internet  Explorer  11 is 
disabled or removed . Within the RSoP report, look for the ‘ Computer Configuration/Administrative 
Templates/Windows Components/Internet Explorer/Disable Internet Explorer 11 as a 
standalone browser ’ setting. It should be enabled . 
Alternatively, request a screenshot of the ‘Windows Features’ that are installed. This 
can be accessed via (Settings – Apps & features – Programs and Features – Turn 
Windows features on or off). Check whether Internet Explorer 11 is installed by 
checking for  a tick or black square. Note, if Internet Explorer 11 has already been 
removed it may not appear in the list of Windows Features.  
Note, as standard user s will  still be able to launch Internet Explorer 11 , even  in 
Microsoft Windows 11 , an application control block rule should be set for iexplore .exe. 
.NET Framework 3.5  
(includes .NET 2.0 and 3.0) is 
disabled or removed . Request a screenshot of the ‘Windows Features’ that a re installed.  
For Microsoft Windows 11, this can be accessed via (Settings – Apps – Optional 
features – More Windows features).  
For Microsoft Windows 10, t his can be accessed via (Settings – Apps & features – 
Programs and Features – Turn Windows features o n or off).  
Check which of the .NET Frameworks are installed by checking for a tick or black 
square.  Note , enabling .NET Framework 3.5 will automatically enable PowerShell 2.0.  
Windows PowerShell 2.0  is 
disabled or removed . Request a screenshot of the ‘Win dows Features’ that are installed.  
For Microsoft Windows 11, this can be accessed via (Settings – Apps – Optional 
features – More Windows features).  
For Microsoft Windows 10, this can be accessed via (Settings – Apps & features – 
Programs and Features – Turn Windows features on or off).  
Check if legacy versions of PowerShell are installed by checking for a tick or black 
square against ‘Windows PowerShell 2.0’.  To check if a downgrade to PowerShell 2.0 is 
available, run the following PowerShell command : 
Get-WindowsOptionalFeature -online | Where -Object {$_.FeatureName -match 
“PowerShellv2”}  
PowerShell is configured to 
use Constrained Language 
Mode.  Request a screenshot of the output of running the f ollowing PowerShell command : 
$ExecutionContext.SessionState. LanguageMode . 
If Constrained Language Mode  is enabled, the output will be ‘ConstrainedLanguage’ . 
Otherwise , the output will be ‘FullLanguage’.  
Blocked PowerShell script 
execution  event s are 
centrally  logged . Run a PowerShell script that should be blocked and request evidence of the associated 
event log entry.  Discuss whether event logs are stored locally or centrally.  
Note, organisations that are comfortable that certain events have a high probability of 
being legitimate may choose to filter them out as pa rt of their centralised collection in 
order to simplify event log analysis and reduce storage requirements.   
 39 
Event logs are protected 
from unauthorised 
modification and deletion.  Discuss whether a SIEM solution is appropriately configured for the protectio n of event 
logs.  
Event logs are monitored for 
signs of compromise and 
actioned when any signs of 
compromise  are detected . Discuss whether a SIEM solution supported by SOC analysts is used to monitor event 
logs for signs of compromise and respond when any signs of compromise are detected.  
 
Restrict administrative privileges  
Context  
Staff seeking access to systems and applications, especially with privileged access, should have a genuine business 
requirement to do so. Once a requirement to access a system o r application is established, staff should be provided  
with  only the privileges they require to undertake their duties. This can be achieved using role -based access controls.  
Just-in-time (JIT) privileged access management (PAM) is an extension of role -based access control in which privileged 
users are only granted the access required to perform their duties immediately before that access is required and for 
only as long as it is required.  
Within an active user session, credentials are cached within the Loc al Security Authority System Service process to 
allow for access to network resources without users having to repeatedly enter their credentials. Windows Defender 
Credential Guard is desig ned to assist in protecting this  process. Windows Defender Remote Cr edential Guard provides 
a similar functionality for remote access.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly co nsidered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Privileged access to systems 
and applications is limited to 
only what is required for 
users and services to 
undertake their duties.  Discuss the approach that the organisation has taken to re strict privileged users to only 
what is required for them to undertake their duties. Often this will involve identifying 
several  different roles, developing policies for those roles and assigning privileged users 
to one or more of those roles depending on their duties. A system administrator should 
be able to demonstrate the different user groups and policies or access controls that 
apply to ea ch. This can confirmed via an RSoP report.  
Privileged accounts  are 
prevented from accessing the 
internet, email an d web 
services.  Use the relevant guidance provided in Maturity Level One of this guide and extend to 
include privileged service accounts.   
 40 
Just-in-time administration 
is used for administering 
systems and applications.  The implementation of JIT PAM is a co mplex activity that forms the basis for restricting 
administrative privileges at Maturity Level Three . Given the complex nature of JIT PAM, 
it will become apparent from discussions as to whether a JIT PAM approach has been 
adopted or not . In doing so, it m ay be worthwhile observing  the process of a system 
administrator requesting and being granted JIT access.  
Windows Defender 
Credential Guard and 
Windows Defender Remote 
Credential Guard are 
enabled.  Within the RS oP report, look for the ‘Turn On Virtualizat ion Based Security’ setting at 
‘Computer Configuration \Policies \Administrative Templates \System \Device Guard \’. It 
should be enabled with a value of ‘Credential Guard Configuration: Enabled with UEFI 
lock’.  
In addition, look for the ‘Restrict delegation of  credentials to remote servers’ setting at 
‘Computer Configuration \Policies \Administrative Templates \System \Credentials 
Delegation \’. It should be enabled with a value of ‘Use the following restricted mode: 
Require Remote Credential Guard’.  
Note, the use o f Windows Defender Credential Guard and Windows Defender Remote 
Credential Guard has several  hardware and software requirements . More information 
on Windows Defender Credential Guard can be found at Microsoft Docs . 
Privileged access  events are  
centrally  logged . Request event logs that should have been generated for typical activities associated 
with the use of a privileged account , such as logging onto a system . Discuss whether 
event logs are  stored locally or centrally.  
Note, organisations that are comfortable that certain events have a high probability of 
being legitimate may choose to filter them out as part of their centralised collection in 
order to simplify event log analysis and reduce storage requirements.  
Privileged account and group 
management events  are 
centrally  logged . If an administrator account was created for testing purposes, request the associated 
event logs that should have been generated when the account was created  and add ed 
to a privileged group . Discuss whether event logs are stored locally or centrally.  
Note, organisations that are comfortable that certain events have a high probability of 
being legitimate may choose to filter them out as part of their centralised collec tion in 
order to simplify event log analysis and reduce storage requirements.  
Event logs are protected 
from unauthorised 
modification and deletion.  Discuss whether a SIEM solution is appropriately configured for the protection of event 
logs.  
Event logs a re monitored for 
signs of compromise and 
actioned when any signs of 
compromise  are detected . Discuss whether a SIEM solution supported by SOC analysts is used to monitor event 
logs for signs of compromise and respond when any signs of compromise are detect ed. 
  
 41 
Patch operating systems  
Context  
At this maturity level, patches, updates or vendor mitigations for security vulnerabilities in operating systems of 
workstations, servers and network devices are required to be applied within two weeks of release, or w ithin 48 hours if 
an exploit exists.  
Modern operating systems for workstations, servers and network devices often contain s ecurity functionality that is not  
available in earlier  releases , even if those earlier releases  remain supported by vendor s. It is im portant that an 
organisation take s advantage of new security functionality in later releases to further mitigat e adversar y activit ies. 
The latest release  of Microsoft Windows and Microsoft Server will depend on the servicing branch being used. Further 
release information  is available from Microsoft. Similar information is often available from vendors of network devices.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Patches, updates or ve ndor 
mitigations for security 
vulnerabilities in operating 
systems of workstations, 
servers and network devices 
are applied within two weeks 
of release , or within 48 hours 
if an exploit exists . Use the relevant guidance provided in Maturity Level One of th is guide and apply the 
Maturity Level Three timeframes when exploits exist for security vulnerabilities.  
The latest release, or the 
previous release, of 
operating systems are used.  Network -based vulnerability scanners can be  used to identify operating sys tems and 
their versions. The output  of these tools can then be used to check against the  latest  
operating system version s available  from vendor s. 
For Microsoft Windows workstations and servers, the ‘winver’ command can be run to 
determine the version of the operating system. Request a screenshot of the output of 
running the ‘winver’ command for servers and workstations (assuming a Standard 
Operating Environment  is used for workstations).  
 
Multi -factor authentication  
Context  
At this maturity level , all users accessing important data repositories should be using  multi -factor authentication. 
Furthermore, the types and combinations of multi -factor authentication are further restricted to avoid weaker forms of 
multi -factor authentication, especially those susc eptible to phishing attacks. This can be achieved by ensuring that 
clients cryptographically verify the authenticity of the server that they are authenticating to. For example, using  
 42 
phishing -resistant  multi -factor authentication  would result in fake Micro soft 365 login pages being identified as such, 
rather than fooling users and capturing their credentials (including additional authentication  factors).  
The acceptable forms of multi -factor authentication at this maturity level are generally limited to incl uding either a 
security key, smartcard or Trusted Platform Module . 
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly co nsidered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Multi -factor authentication 
is used to authenticate users 
accessing important data 
repositories.  Request  a list of important data repositories for the system  and associated  screenshots 
of users attempting to access each of these data repositories. The screenshots should 
show multiple forms of authentication being requested.  
Multi -factor authentication is 
phishing -resistant and  uses 
either:  something users have 
and something users know, 
or so mething users have that 
is unlocked by something 
users know or are.  Discuss the form  of multi -factor authentication that ha s been implement ed. Note, 
different  forms of multi -factor authentication may exist depending on the  range of 
systems , services and da ta repositories  that users authenticate to.  
Successful and unsuccessful 
multi -factor authentication  
event s are centrally  logged . Use the guidance provided in Maturity Level Two of this guide and extend it to include 
event logs for multi -factor authenticat ion performed when accessing  important data 
repositories.  Discuss whether event logs are stored locally or centrally.  
Note, organisations that are comfortable that certain events have a high probability of 
being legitimate may choose to filter them out as part of their centralised collection in 
order to simplify event log analysis and reduce storage requirements.  
Event logs are protected 
from unauthorised 
modification and deletion.  Discuss whether a SIEM solution is appropriately configured for the protect ion of event 
logs.  
Event logs are monitored for 
signs of compromise and 
actioned when any signs of 
compromise  are detected . Discuss whether a SIEM solution supported by SOC analysts is used to monitor event 
logs for signs of compromise and respond when an y signs of compromise are detected.  
  
 43 
Regular backups  
Context  
At this maturity level, only a subset of privileged accounts (i.e. backup administrator  account s) should be  able to access 
backups. The increasing level of controls around which accounts can acc ess backups, and to what extent, progressively 
limits the damage that may be caused by a ransomware incident.  
In addition, at this maturity level , all accounts ( except for  break glass accounts) should  not be able to modify and  delete 
backups.  
Assessment guidance  
The section below  provide s guidance tailored to the assessment method . When selecting a method , the quality of the 
evidence provided by each method  should be strongly considered.  
Control  Assessment Guidance (ordered by effectiveness)  
Unprivileged a ccounts cannot 
access backups belonging to 
other accounts , nor their 
own accounts . Use the guidance provided in Maturity Level One of this guide and apply the Maturity 
Level Three access control requirements. Specifically, unprivileged accounts should no 
longer be able to access their own backups.  
Privileged accounts 
(excluding backup 
administrator  account s) 
cannot access backups 
belonging to other accounts , 
nor their own accounts . Use the guidance provided in Maturity Level One of this guide and apply the  Maturity 
Level Three access control requirements. Specifically, privileged accounts (excluding 
backup administrator accounts) should no lo nger be able to access their own backups.  
Active Directory queries and tools such as BloodHound  can help to identify privileged 
accounts including backup administrator  account s. 
Privileged accounts 
(including  backup 
administrator accounts) are 
prevented from m odifying 
and deleting backup s during 
their retention period . Use the guidance provided in Maturity Level One of this guide and apply the Maturity 
Level Three access control requirements. Specifically, backup administrator  account s 
should no  longer be able to modify and  delete backups  during their retention period, 
but may do so after the retention period has been exceeded . 
The modification and deletion of backups during their retention period, should s uch 
activities  be required,  need to  be restricted to break glass accounts . 
Active Directory queries and tools such as BloodHound  can help to identify privileged 
accounts (including backup administrato r account s) and break glass accounts . 
 
Stage 4: Development of the security  assessment 
report  
In developing the security  assessment report, a ssessors should use the ACSC’s Essential Eight Assessment Report 
Template . However, a ssessors can use their own report templates for branding purposes if all section s from the ACSC’s  
template  are included.   
 44 
Further information  
The Information Security Manual  is a cyber security framew ork that organisations can apply to protect their systems 
and data from cyber threats. The advice in the Strategies to Mitigate Cyber Security Incidents , along with its Essential  
Eight , complements this framework.  
A mapping between the requirements of the Essential Eight Maturity M odel  and the Information Security Manual  can 
be found in the Essential Eight Maturity Model to ISM Mapping  publication.  
Contact details  
If you have any questions re garding this guidance you can write to us  or call us on 1300 CYBER1 (1300 292 371) . 
 45 Annex A: Example Assessment Test Plan – Maturity Level One  
Mitigation Strategy  Cont rol Description  Test ID  Test Description  Test Methodology  
Application control  The execution of 
executables, software 
libraries, scripts, 
installers, compiled 
HTML, HTML 
applications and 
control panel applets is 
prevented on 
workstations from 
within standa rd user 
profiles and temporary 
folders used by the 
operating system, web 
browsers and email 
clients.  ML1 -AC-01 (Workstations) Executable files in the user profile directory and temporary 
folders used by the operating system, web browsers and email clients,  cannot 
execute by a standard user.  The tester should attempt to execute a benign executable (EXE or COM) file inside of the user profile directory. The tester s hould 
be aware that subfolders within the user profile may have different behaviour depending o n the configuration.  
ACVT can perform path enumeration tests to assist in identifying locations within the user directories that can execute execu table 
files. E8MVT will perform limited testing for file execution in user profiles and temporary directories.  
ML1 -AC-02 (Workstations) Software library files in the user profile directory and 
temporary folders used by the operating system, web browsers and email 
clients, cannot execute by a standard user.  The tester should attempt to execute a benign software library (DLL or OCX) file inside of the user profile directory. The tester 
should be aware that subfolders within the user profile may have different behaviour depending on the configuration.  
E8MVT will perform limited (single folder) testing for file exec ution in user profiles and temporary directories.  
ML1 -AC-03 (Workstations) Script files in the user profile directory and temporary folders 
used by the operating system, web browsers and email clients, cannot execute 
by a standard user.  The tester shoul d attempt to execute multiple benign script (PS, VBS, BAT or JS) files inside of the user profile directory. The 
tester should be aware that subfolders within the user profile may have different behaviour depending on the configuration.  
E8MVT will perform limited (single folder) testing for file execution in user profiles and temporary directories.  
ML1 -AC-04 (Workstations) Installer files in the user profile directory and temporary folders 
used by the operating system, web browsers and email clients, can not execute 
by a standard user.  The tester should attempt to execute a benign installer (MSI, MST or MSP) file inside of the user profile directory. The test er 
should be aware that subfolders within the user profile may have different behaviour depending o n the configuration.  
E8MVT will perform limited (single folder) testing for file execution in user profiles and temporary directories.  
ML1 -AC-05 (Workstations) Compiled HTML files in the user profile directory and 
temporary folders used by the operating  system, web browsers and email 
clients, cannot execute by a standard user.  The tester should attempt to execute a benign compiled HTML (CHM) file inside of the user profile directory. The tester shoul d be 
aware that subfolders within the user profile may have different behaviour depending on the configuration.  
E8MVT will perform limited (single folder) testing for file execution in user profiles and temporary directories.  
ML1 -AC-06 (Workstations) HTML applications files in the user profile directory and  
temporary folders used by the operating system, web browsers and email 
clients, cannot execute by a standard user.  The tester should attempt to execute a benign HTML application (HTA) file inside of the user profile directory. The tester sh ould 
be aware t hat subfolders within the user profile may have different behaviour depending on the configuration.  
E8MVT will perform limited (single folder) testing for file execution in user profiles and temporary directories.  
ML1 -AC-07 (Workstations) Control panel applet files in the user profile directory and 
temporary folders used by the operating system, web browsers and email 
clients, cannot execute by a standard user.  The tester should attempt to execute a benign control panel applet (CPL) file inside of the us er profile directory. The tester should 
be aware that subfolders within the user profile may have different behaviour depending on the configuration.  
E8MVT will perform limited (single folder) testing for file execution in user profiles and temporary direc tories.  
Patch applications  An automated method 
of asset discovery  is 
used at least 
fortnightly to support 
the detection of assets 
for subsequent 
vulnerability scanning 
activities.  ML1 -PA-01 An automated method of asset discovery  is run and reviewed at lea st 
fortnightly . Confirm that a method of asset discovery  is in place ( such as an asset discovery tool or a vulnerability scanner with equivalent 
functionality) and that it is configured to be run in an automated manner at least every fortnight. Confirm tha t any anomalies  
that are identified are reviewed and actioned.  
A vulnerability scanner 
with an up -to-date 
vulnerability database ML1 -PA-02 A vulnerability scanner with an up -to-date vulnerability database is  being used 
for vulnerability scanning activities.  Confirm that a vu lnerability scanner is in place and that the vulnerability database it uses is being updated within 24 hours prior 
to its use.   
 46 is used for vulnerability 
scanning activities.  
A vulnerability scanner 
is used at least daily to 
identify missing 
patches or updates for 
security vulnerabilities 
in internet -facing 
services.  ML1 -PA-03 (Internet -Facing Services) A vulnerability scanner for internet -facing services is 
run and reviewed daily.  Confirm that a vulnerability scanner is in place, and it is configured to scan the organisation ’s internet -facing services. Confirm 
that reports from the vulnerability scanner are reviewed by the responsible staff daily, and that identified issues have been  
observed and actioned.  
A vulnerability scanner 
is used at least 
fortnightly to identify 
missing patches or 
updates for security 
vulnerabilities in office 
productivity suites, 
web browsers and 
their extensions, email 
clients, PDF software, 
and security products.  ML1 -PA-04 A vulnerability scanner is run and  reviewed at least fortnightly to scan the 
organisation ’s office productivity suites, web browsers, email clients, PDF 
software and security products.  Confirm that a vulnerability scanner is in place, and it is configured to scan the organisation ’s applica tions listed, typically 
requiring a credentialed scan. Confirm that reports from the vulnerability scanner are reviewed by the responsible staff 
fortnightly, and that identified issues have been observed and actioned.  
Patches, updates or 
vendor mitigatio ns for 
security vulnerabilities 
in internet -facing 
services are applied 
within two weeks of 
release, or within 48 
hours if an exploit 
exists.  ML1 -PA-05 (Internet -Facing Services) The organisation has a process for identifying 
vulnerabilities in internet -facing services within 48 hours and has an example 
of where an available exploit has been identified and patched within 48 hours.  Review the process in place for identifying vulnerabilities in internet -facing systems. Request evidence of the identification a nd 
patching of a system that contained an exploitable vulnerability within the environment.  
ML1 -PA-06 (Internet -Facing Services) Applications with an exploit that has been available 
for greater than 48 hours are patched or mitigated.  Use a vulnerability  scanner to identify applications within the environment and check that they have been patched against a 
known exploit. Determine the date the patch was installed and compare to when the patch was made available.  
ML1 -PA-07 (Internet -Facing Services) App lications are patched or mitigated within two 
weeks.  Use a vulnerability scanner to identify applications within the environment and check that they have been patched against a 
known exploit. Determine the date the patch was installed and compare to when t he patch was made available.  
Patches, updates or 
vendor mitigations for 
security vulnerabilities 
in office productivity 
suites, web browsers 
and their extensions, 
email clients, PDF 
software, and security 
products are applied 
within one month of 
release.  ML1 -PA-08 The organisation has an effective process for patching office productivity 
suites, web browsers, email clients, PDF software and security products within 
one month.  Confirm the existence of a list of applications, and where the applications are installed. Ensure a process for identifying 
vulnerabilities for software in the list is consistently followed. Request evidence of the patching of these applications wit hin one 
month.  
ML1 -PA-09 Office productivity suites, web browsers, email clients, PD F software and 
security products do not have security vulnerabilities older than one month.  Use a vulnerability scanner to identify the listed applications within the organisation ’s environment, and check that they have 
been patched against a known exploit . Check the date the application was updated and compare to the date the patch was 
released. Ensure that the gap between is not greater than one month.  
E8MVT will perform basic checks of some Microsoft Office applications based on version numbers and file modification dates to 
determine if the software has been updated recently.  
Internet -facing 
services, office 
productivity suites, 
web browsers and 
their extensions, email 
clients, PDF software, 
Adobe Flash Player, ML1 -PA-10 The organisation has removed unsupported internet -facing services from the 
environment.  Confirm that the environment does not contain software on internet -facing systems that is no longer supported by the vendor.  
Use a vulnerability scanner to identify applications within the environment and check they are supported.  
ML1 -PA-11 The organisation has removed unsupported office productivity suites, web 
browsers, email clients, PDF software and security products fro m the 
environment.  Confirm that the environment does not contain any of the listed software that is no longer supported by the vendor. Use a 
vulnerability scanner to identify applications within the environment and check they are supported.   
 47 and security products 
that are no longer 
supported by vendors 
are removed.  
Configure 
Micr osoft Office 
macro settings  Microsoft Office 
macros are disabled 
for users that do not 
have a demonstrated 
business requirement.  ML1 -OM-01 A technical solution exists that blocks Microsoft Office macros for users who 
are not approved under the Microsoft Of fice macro policy.  Run RSOP on workstations to identify the Microsoft Office macro security settings applied by group policy  settings . This should 
typically be set to ‘Disable without notification ’. Note ‘Disable with notification ’ allows users to bypass t his control and does not 
meet the intent. Check for Active Directory security groups that enforce Microsoft Office  macro blocking.  
Test running Microsoft Office  macros on a user in the disallowed group. E8MVT will attempt to execute a Microsoft Office  macr o 
within a document.  
ML1 -OM-02 A record is kept of users that have been approved to allow Microsoft Office  
macro execution, and this list matches the list of users within the technical 
solution.  Confirm a repository of approved requests for users to exe cute Microsoft Office  macros is maintained and up to date and 
matches the technical implementation. Typically, this means the Active Directory Security Group that permits Microsoft Office  
macro use should match the list of users who have been approved to r un Microsoft Office  macros.  
Microsoft Office 
macros in files 
originating from the 
internet are blocked.  ML1 -OM-03 Microsoft Office files from the internet are unable to execute Microsoft Office  
macros.  Attempt to run Microsoft Office  macros in Microsoft Office files  from the internet. Confirm these files are blocked when received 
by download and email. Do this for all installed Microsoft Office applications.  
E8MVT will open a test file that contains a zone identifier to indicate it is from the internet.  
ML1 -OM-04 Microsoft Office has been configured to block Microsoft Office  macros from 
running in Microsoft Office files from the internet.  Check if the following group policy setting is enabled. Do this for all installed Microsoft Office applications User  
Configuration/Policies/Administrative Templates/Microsoft <Application><Version>/Application Settings/Security/Trust 
Center/Block macros from running in Office files from the internet . 
Check if the following registry value exists and is set to 1. Do this for all installed Microsoft Office applications 
Computer \HKEY_CURRENT_USER \SOFTWARE \Policies \Microsoft \office \<version> \<Application> \security \blockcontentexecutionfr
omInternet . 
E8MVT will check that these registry settings are configured to the correct se tting.  
Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \SOFTWARE \Policies \Microsoft \office \<version> \<application> \security \” | Select -Object -
Property bl ockcontentexecutionfromInternet  
Example: Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \SOFTWARE \Policies \Microsoft \office \16.0 \excel \secu rity\” | Select -Object -Property 
blockcontentexecutionfromInternet  
Microsoft Office macro 
antivirus scanning is 
enabled.  ML1 -OM-05 The system has macroruntimescope enabled for Microsoft Office applications  
in registry settings or has an alternative Micro soft Office  macro scanning ability 
in place.  Check if the following group policy setting is enabled for all Microsoft Office applications  User 
Configuration/Policies/Administrative Templates/Microsoft Office <Version>/Security Settings/Macro Runtime Scan S cope . 
E8MVT will check the registry to confirm that the policy setting is configured.  
ML1 -OM-06 System anti -virus successfully detects a virus test signature inside of a 
Microsoft Office macro in a Microsoft Office  file. Attempt to run a pseudo maliciou s Microsoft Office  macro that contains an EICAR test string. E8MVT will open a test file 
containing a Microsoft Office  macro that will write the EICAR test string to a file.  
Microsoft Office macro 
security settings 
cannot be changed by 
users.  ML1 -OM-07 A standard user is unable to modify the security settings for Microsoft Office  
macros in all Microsoft Office applications . Open the application and attempt to change the Microsoft Office  macro security settings in the Trust Center. Do this for all 
installe d Microsoft Office applications.  
User application 
hardening  Web browsers do not 
process Java from the 
internet.  ML1 -AH-01 Java content does not execute in Microsoft  Edge.  Load a website with known Java content and check if it renders  in the web browser . Check the registry keys at 
HKLM: \SOFTWARE \Oracle \JavaDeploy \WebDeployJava  and HKLM: \SOFTWARE \JavaSoft \Java Plug -in\. 
Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKLM: \SOFTWARE \Oracle \JavaDeploy \WebDeployJava”  
Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKLM: \SOFTWARE \JavaSoft \Java Plug -in”  
 48 ML1 -AH-02 Java content does not execute in Google Chrome.  Load a website with known Java content and check if it renders  in the web browser . 
ML1 -AH-03 Java content does not execute in Mozilla Firefox.  Load a website with known Java content and check if it renders  in the web browser . 
Web browsers do not 
process web 
advertisements from 
the internet.  ML1 -AH-04 Web ads do not display in Microsoft Edge.  Load a website in Microsoft Edge with known ads and check if it render s in the web browser. Check the ‘Block  ads on sites that 
show intrusive or misleading ads’ setting is configured. Check if any ad blocking plugins are configured in the web browser.  
ML1 -AH-05 Web ads do not display in Google Chrome.  Load a website in Google Chrome with known ads and check i f it render s in the web browser. Check the ‘Block ads on sites that 
show intrusive or misleading ads’ setting is configured. Check if any ad blocking plugins are configured in the web browser.  
ML1 -AH-06 Web ads do not display in Mozilla Firefox.  Load a website in Mozilla Firefox with known ads and check if it render s in the web browser. Check if any ad blocking plugins are 
configured in the web browser.  
Internet Explorer 11 
does not process 
content from the 
internet.  ML1 -AH-07 Internet Explorer 11 is unable to connect to internet sites. Internet Explorer  11 
may be allowed to access internal web applications only.  If Internet Explorer 11 is installed, access an external website using the web  browser and ensure it is blocked. If it is not installed, 
use a  manual request method (script, curl, proxy) with modified request headers to imitate IE (e.g. User -Agent) and check if the 
request is blocked. Review proxy or firewall configuration for the existence of rules to prevent IE specific browsing from re aching 
the internet.  
Web browser security 
settings cannot be 
changed by users.  ML1 -AH-08 Microsoft Edge settings cannot be changed by a standard user.  Check that group policy settings are configur ed for Microsoft Edge . Open the web browser configuration panel a nd look for 
existence of a ‘Managed by organisation’ message or similar. Attempt to change a setting related to networking or security, s uch 
as blocking of ads, proxy settings or security level.  
ML1 -AH-09 Google Chrome settings cannot be changed by a st andard user.  Check that group policy settings are configur ed for Google Chrome . Open the web browser configuration panel and look for 
existence of a ‘Managed by organisation’ message or similar. Attempt to change a setting related to networking or security , such 
as blocking of ads, proxy settings or security level.  
ML1 -AH-10 Mozilla Firefox settings cannot be changed by a standard user.  Check that group policy settings are configur ed for Mozilla Firefox . Open the web browser configuration panel and look for 
existence of a ‘Managed by organisation’ message or similar. Attempt to change a setting related to networking or security, s uch 
as blocking of ads, proxy settings or security level.  
ML1 -AH-11 Internet Explorer 11 settings cannot be changed by a sta ndard user.  Check that group policy settings are configur ed for Internet Explorer  11. Open the web browser configuration panel and look for 
existence of a ‘Managed by organisation’ message or similar. Attempt to change a setting related to networking or se curity, such 
as blocking of ads, proxy settings or security level.  
Restrict 
administrative 
privileges  Requests for privileged 
access to systems and 
applications are 
validated when first 
requested.  ML1 -RA-01 A process exists and is enforced for granting pr ivileged access to systems.  Confirm the organisation has a documented, approved and enforced privileged access process that outlines the requirements for  
provisioning a privileged account to a system or application. Confirm the organisation has a list of s ystems and applications that 
require privileged access.  
Review documented privileged access process and systems. Request evidence of process being followed  (e.g. support  tickets ). 
Privileged accounts 
(excluding privileged 
service accounts) are 
prevented from 
accessing the internet, 
email and web 
services.  ML1 -RA-02 Privileged accounts (excluding privileged service accounts) cannot access the 
internet or web services via a web browser or other mechanism.  While logged in as a privileged user, attempt to bro wse to an internet website. Review the configuration preventing internet 
access and attempt to change this as a privileged user not responsible for administering that system. Privileged accounts not  
responsible for administering these systems should not be  able to change settings to access the internet.  
While privileged account policies should be reviewed, they do not satisfy this control without additional technical mechanism s. 
ML1 -RA-03 Privileged accounts are not configured with mailboxes and email ad dresses.  Attempt to open Microsoft Outlook on a system using the privileged account.  
Run the  following  PowerShell command Get-ADUser -Filter {(admincount -eq 1) -and (emailaddress -like “*”) -and (enabled -eq 
$true)} -Properties EmailAddress | Select samac countname, emailaddress   
 49 Privileged users use 
separate privileged 
and unprivileged 
operating 
environments.  ML1 -RA-04 All administrative activities are performed in an administrative environment 
that is segmented from the standard user network environment.  A separate 
environment is provisioned for the use of privileged access and is not used for 
any other purpose.  Attempt to access the administrative network environment using a standard account. Attempt to access the standard 
environment using a privileged account. Look for evidence of administrative access to unprivileged environments, using tools 
such as Bloodhound. Check for the existence of workstations that exist solely for privileged access purposes.  
The privileged operating environment must not be vir tualised within the unprivileged operating environment for Maturity Level 
Two or Maturity Level Three. However, it can be for Maturity Level One.  
Unprivileged accounts 
cannot logon to 
privileged operating 
environments.  ML1 -RA-05 Unprivileged accounts are  not able to logon to systems in the privileged 
environment.  Use Bloodhound to analyse Active Directory data and look for which users and groups have RDP access to servers. Review group 
policy  settings  for RDP permissions.  
ML1 -RA-06 Unprivileged user pr evented from using the PowerShell remote PSRemote 
windows feature.  Run the following PowerShell command (Get -PSSessionConfiguration -Name Microsoft.PowerShell).Permission  
Check the members of the built -in Active Directory Security Group Remote Management U sers.  
Privileged accounts 
(excluding local 
administrator 
accounts) cannot logon 
to unprivileged 
operating 
environments.  ML1 -RA-07 A privileged account cannot be used to authenticate and interactively login to 
standard user workstations, or other unprivil eged environments. Limited -
permission administrative accounts can be used to meet business 
requirements in unprivileged environments, such as for help desk personnel.  Attempt to login with a privileged account to a standard user workstation. Check group po licy settings  for ‘Deny logon locally’ and 
‘Deny log on through Remote Desktop Services user rights’ to workstations for privileged accounts.  
Limited -permission administrative accounts can be used to meet business requirements in unprivileged environments,  such as for 
help desk personnel. These accounts should not be highly privileged.  
Review list of administrative users who can login to unprivileged environments. None of the users should be highly privileged , for 
example Domain Administrators. These users should not be able to access the privileged environment.  
ML1 -RA-08 An unprivileged account logged into a standard user workstation cannot raise 
privileges to a privileged user.  While logged in as a standard user, attempt to use ‘runas’ to open an applic ation as an administrator. Attempt other ways (e.g. 
WinRM, Computer Management or RDP) to escalate privileges to an administrator.  
Patch operating 
systems  An automated method 
of asset discovery  is 
used at least 
fortnightly to support 
the detection of asse ts 
for subsequent 
vulnerability scanning 
activities.  ML1 -PO-01 An automated method of asset discovery  is run and reviewed at least 
fortnightly . Confirm that a method of asset discovery  is in place (such as an asset discovery tool or a vulnerability scanner  with equivalent 
functionality) and that it is configured to be run in an automated manner at least every fortnight. Confirm that any anomalies  
that are identified are reviewed and actioned.  
A vulnerability scanner 
with an up -to-date 
vulnerability databa se 
is used for vulnerability 
scanning activities.  ML1 -PO-02 A vulnerability scanner with an up -to-date vulnerability database is being used 
for vulnerability scanning activities.  Confirm that a vu lnerability scanner is in place and that the vulnerability d atabase it uses is being updated within 24 hours prior 
to its use.  
A vulnerability scanner 
is used at least daily to 
identify missing 
patches or updates for 
security vulnerabilities 
in operating systems of 
internet -facing 
services.  ML1 -PO-03 A vulnerabil ity scanner is run and reviewed daily to scan the organisation ’s 
internet -facing services.  Confirm that a vulnerability scanner is in place, and it is configured to scan the organisation ’s internet -facing services. Confirm 
that reports from the vulnerabili ty scanner are reviewed by the responsible staff daily, and that identified issues have been 
observed and actioned.  
A vulnerability scanner 
is used at least 
fortnightly to identify 
missing patches or ML1 -PO-04 A vulnerability scanner is run and reviewed at least fortnightly to scan the 
organisation ’s operating s ystems.  Confirm that a vulnerability scanner is in place, and it is configured to scan the or ganisation ’s operating systems, typically 
requiring a credentialed scan. Confirm that reports from the vulnerability scanner are reviewed by the responsible staff 
fortnightly, and that identified issues have been observed and actioned.   
 50 updates for security 
vulnerabilities in 
operating syst ems of 
workstations, servers 
and network devices.  
Patches, updates o r 
vendor mitigations for 
security vulnerabilities 
in operating systems of 
internet -facing services 
are applied within two 
weeks of release, or 
within 48 hours if an 
exploit exists.  ML1 -PO-05 The organisation has an example of where an available exploit has  been 
identified and patched within 48 hours.  If available, request evidence of the identification and patching of a system that contained an exploitable vulnerability wit hin the 
environment.  
ML1 -PO-06 Internet -facing system that have a vulnerable opera ting system with an exploit 
that has been available for  greater than  48 hours are patched or mitigated.  View vulnerability management solution, logon to server to verify patch applied successfully or review mitigation strategy.  
E8MVT will assesses based on  most recently installed critical patch. Does not test for existing exploits or 48 -hour timeframe 
requirements.  
ML1 -PO-07 Internet -facing systems that have a vulnerable operating system are patched 
or mitigated within two weeks.  Use vulnerability manage ment solution to perform a patch audit of servers.  
Retrieve the update history of the workstation, noting the release date of the patch and the date it was installed. Look for 
differences greater than two weeks.  
Patches, updates or 
vendor mitigations for  
security vulnerabilities 
in operating systems of 
workstations, servers 
and network devices 
are applied within one 
month of release.  ML1 -PO-08 The organisation has an effective process for patching operating s ystems 
within one month.  Confirm the existence of a list of managed operating systems, and where they are located. Ensure a process for identifying 
vulnerabilities for operating s ystems in the list is consistently followed. Request evidence of the patching of these systems within 
one month.  
ML1 -PO-09 Operating systems that have a vulnerability are patched or mitigated within 
one month.  Use a vulnerability management solution to perform a patch audit of all systems.  
Retrieve the update history of the systems in scope, noting the release date of the pa tch and the date it was installed. Look for 
differences greater than one month.  
Operating systems that 
are no longer 
supported by vendors 
are replaced.  ML1 -PO-10 The organisation has removed unsupported operating s ystems from the 
environment.  Confirm tha t the environment does not contain any operating s ystems no longer supported by the vendor. Use a vulnerability 
scanner to identify operating s ystems within the environment and check they are supported.  
Multi -factor 
authentication  Multi -factor 
authenticat ion is used 
by an organisation ’s 
users if they 
authenticate to their 
organisation’s 
internet -facing 
services.  ML1 -MF-01 The organisation has a verified and approved list of internet -facing services 
operating within the organisation.  Confirm an approved lis t of internet -facing services exists and this list is regularly checked.  
ML1 -MF-02 The organisational remote access desktop solution presents a MFA  challenge 
when attempting to authenticate.  Verify the user is presented with a MFA challenge when authent icating to the organisation ’s remote solution.  
ML1 -MF-03 Organisational internet -facing systems present a MFA  challenge when 
attempting to authenticate.  Verify the user is presented with a MFA challenge when authenticating to the organisation ’s internet -facing systems.  
Multi -factor 
authentication is used 
by an organisation’s 
users if they 
authenticate to third -
party internet -facing 
services that process, 
store or communicate 
their organisation ’s 
sensitive data.  ML1 -MF-04 Third -party internet -facing ser vices that hold sensitive data are configured to 
require users to use MFA.  Verify the organisation ’s sensitive third -party internet -facing services are configured with MFA. Confirm the organisation has a 
policy that MFA will be implemented on all third -party internet -facing services that hold sensitive data.   
 51 Multi -factor 
authentication (where 
available) is used by an 
organisation’s users if 
they authenticate to 
third -party internet -
facing services that 
process, store or 
communicate their 
organisation ’s non-
sensitive data.  ML1 -MF-05 Third -party internet -facing services that hold non -sensitive data are configured 
to require users to use MFA.  Verify the organisation ’s third -party internet -facing services are configured with MFA. Confirm the organisation has a  policy that 
MFA will be implemented on all third -party internet -facing services that hold non -sensitive data.  
Multi -factor 
authentication is 
enabled by default for 
non-organisational 
users (but users can 
choose to opt out) if 
they authenticate to 
an org anisation’s 
internet -facing 
services.  ML1 -MF-06 The organisational internet -facing services with non -organisational user 
presents a multi-factor challenge when attempting to authenticate by default.  Verify non -organisational users are presented with a MFA challenge when accessing organisational systems by default. Users may 
elect to opt out of this feature.  
Regular backups  Backups of important 
data, software and 
configuration settings 
are performed and 
retained with a 
frequency and 
retention timeframe in 
accordance with 
business continuity 
requirements.  ML1 -RB-01 The org anisation has a b usiness continuity plan (BCP) that  outlin es their 
important data, software and configuration  settings  that require backing up.  Request the current BCP. Note when the BCP was last modified  as old BCPs often don ’t reference the current environment. 
Confirm the organisation has a defined list of important data, software and configuration settings.  
ML1 -RB-02 Important data, software and configuration settings are  backed up and 
retained as per the timeframes outlined within the BCP. Verify important data, software and configuration settings are backed up and retained in accordance with the BCP. 
Backups of important  
data , software and 
configuration settings 
are synchronised to 
enable restoration to a 
common point in time . ML1 -RB-03 Important data, software and configuration settings are backed up in a 
synchronised manner using a common point in time.  Verify important data, software and configuration settings are backed up in a s ynchronised manner using a common point in 
time . 
Backups of important 
data, software and 
configuration settings 
are retained in a 
secure and resilient 
manner . ML1 -RB-04 Important data, software and configuration settings are backed up and 
retained in a secure and resilient manner.  Verify important data, software and configuration settings are backed up and retained in a secure and resilient manner.  
Restoration of 
important data, 
software and 
configuration settings 
from backups to a ML1 -RB-05 The organisation has documented evidence of a disaster recovery exercise 
being performed. This includes examples of where important data , software 
and configuration settings have  been restored fro m backups.  Verify the organisation has conducted a disaster recovery exercise. Verify the organisation has successfully restored importa nt 
data , software and configuration settings  as part of this exercise. Confirm the existence of a disaster recovery plan (DRP), and 
ensure it is appropriate, relevant, and followed during incidents and exercises.   
 52 common point in time 
is tested as part of 
disaster recovery 
exercises.  
Unprivileged accounts 
cannot access backups 
belonging to other 
accounts.  ML1 -RB-06 Unprivileged users are unable to access backups that do not belong to them.  Verify access controls restrict access to only the owner of the information.  
Unprivileged accounts 
are prevented from 
modifying and deleting 
backups.  ML1-RB-07 Unprivileg ed users are unable to modify and  delete backups.  Verify access controls restrict the modification and deletion of backups.  
   
 53 Annex B: Example Assessment Test Plan – Maturity Level Two  
Mitigation Strategy  Control Description  Test ID  Test Description  Test Methodology  
Application control  Application control is 
implemented on 
workstations an d 
internet -facing 
servers . ML2 -AC-01 (Workstations & Internet -facing servers) A dedicated application control 
solution is implemented.  Check whether a n in-built or third -party application control solution has been implemented.  
Application control 
restric ts the execution 
of executables, 
software libraries, 
scripts, installers, 
compiled HTML, HTML 
applications and 
control panel applets  
to an organisation -
approved set . ML2 -AC-02 (Workstations & Internet -facing servers) The system is only able to execute 
appr oved executables.  Attempt to execute an unapproved, benign executable. Depending on the policy, there may be directories or specific versions o f 
software that may be allowed to run, but might not be organisationally approved. The tester will have to consid er possible policy 
bypass locations when performing this test.  
E8MVT will attempt to run an exe file within the local AppData temp directory. ACVT will recursively copy an exe file to the file 
system and attempt to execute it.  
ML2 -AC-03 (Workstations & Internet -facing servers) The system is only able to execute 
approved software libraries.  Attempt to execute an unapproved, benign software library. Depending on the policy, there may be directories or specific 
versions of software that may be allowed to ru n, but might not be organisationally approved. The tester will have to consider 
possible policy bypass locations when performing this test.  
E8MVT will attempt to run a dll file within the local AppData temp directory. ACVT will recursively copy a dll file to the file system 
and attempt to execute it.  
ML2 -AC-04 (Workstations & Internet -facing servers) The system is only able to execute 
approved scripts.  Attempt to execute an unapproved, benign scripts. Depending on the policy, there may be directories or specific versions of 
software that may be allowed to run, but might not be organisationally approved. The tester will have to consider possible po licy 
bypass locations when performing this test.  
E8MVT will attempt to run multiple script files within the lo cal AppData temp directory. ACVT will recursively copy multiple script 
files to the file system and attempt to execute them.  
ML2 -AC-05 (Workstations & Internet -facing servers) The system is only able to execute 
approved installers.  Attempt to execute an  unapproved, benign installers. Depending on the policy, there may be directories or specific versions of 
software that may be allowed to run, but might not be organisationally approved. The tester will have to consider possible by pass 
locations when perfo rming this test.  
E8MVT will attempt to run a MSI file that will install a text file into the local AppData temp directory.  
ML2 -AC-06 (Workstations & Internet -facing servers) The system is only able to execute 
approved compiled HTML files.  Attempt to exe cute an unapproved benign compiled HTML file. Depending on the policy, there may be directories or specific 
versions of software that may be allowed to run, but might not be organisationally approved. The tester will have to consider  
possible bypass locati ons when performing this test.  
The tester should first test that HH.exe is allowed to execute. If HH.exe is unable to execute than further testing may not b e 
required.  
E8MVT will attempt to run a compiled HTML file within the local AppData temp directory.  
ML2 -AC-07 (Workstations & Internet -facing servers) The system is only able to execute 
approved HTML applications.  Attempt to execute an unapproved, benign HTML applications. Depending on the policy, there may be directories or specific 
versions of softw are that may be allowed to run, but might not be organisationally approved. The tester will have to consider 
possible bypass locations when performing this test.  
The tester should first test that MSHTA.exe is allowed to execute. If MSHTA.exe is unable to e xecute than further testing may not 
be required.  
E8MVT will attempt to run an HTML Application file within the local AppData temp directory.   
 54 ML2 -AC-08 (Workstations & Internet -facing servers) The system is only able to execute an 
approved control panel applets.  Attempt to execute an unapproved benign control panel applet. Depending on the policy, there may be directories or specific 
versions of software that may be allowed to run, but might not be organisationally approved. The tester will have to consid er 
possible bypass locations when performing this test.  
The tester should first test that CONTROL.exe is allowed to execute. If CONTROL.exe is unable to execute than further testing  may 
not be required.  
E8MVT will attempt to run a Control Panel Applet file  within the local AppData temp directory.  
Allowed and blocked 
execution events on 
workstations and 
internet -facing servers 
are logged.  ML2 -AC-09 (Workstations & Internet -facing servers) The system is logging the application 
control product when it allows  and blocks execution.  Verify event logs contain required data (does not require central storage). Ensure all systems are logging.  
Patch applications  A vulnerability scanner 
is used at least weekly  
to identify missing 
patches or updates for 
security vulne rabilities 
in office productivity 
suites, web browsers 
and their extensions, 
email clients, PDF 
software, and security 
products.  ML2 -PA-01 A vulnerability scanner is run and reviewed at least weekly to scan the 
organisation ’s office productivity suites, we b browsers, email clients, PDF 
software and security products.  Confirm that a vulnerability scanner is in place, and it is configured to scan the organisation ’s applications listed, typically 
requiring a credentialed scan. Confirm that reports from the vul nerability scanner are reviewed by the responsible staff weekly, 
and that identified issues have been observed and actioned.  
A vulnerability 
scanner is used at 
least fortnightly to 
identify missing 
patches or updates for 
security vulnerabilities 
in other  applications.  ML2 -PA-02 A vulnerability scanner is run and reviewed at least fortnightly to scan the 
organisation ’s other applications.  Confirm that a vulnerability scanner is in place, and it is configured to scan the organisation ’s other applications, t ypically 
requiring a credentialed scan. Confirm that reports from the vulnerability scanner are reviewed by the responsible staff 
fortnightly, and that identified issues have been observed and actioned.  
Patches, updates or 
vendor mitigations for 
security  vulnerabilities 
in office productivity 
suites, web browsers 
and their extensions, 
email clients, PDF 
software, and security 
products are applied 
within two weeks  of 
release.  ML2 -PA-03 The organisation has an effective process for patching office productiv ity 
suites, web browsers, email clients, PDF software and security products within 
two weeks.  Confirm the existence of a list of applications, and where the applications are installed. Ensure a process for identifying 
vulnerabilities for software in the li st is consistently followed. Request evidence of the patching of these applications within two 
weeks.  
ML2 -PA-04 Office productivity suites, web browsers, email clients, PDF software and 
security products do not have security vulnerabilities older than t wo weeks.  Use a vulnerability scanner to identify the listed applications within the organisation ’s environment, and check that they have 
been patched against a known exploit. Check the date the application was updated and compare to the date the patch was  
released. Ensure that the gap between is not greater than two weeks.  
E8MVT will perform basic checks of some Microsoft Office applications based on version numbers and file modification dates to 
determine if the software has been updated recently.  
Patch es, updates or 
vendor mitigations for 
security vulnerabilities 
in other applications 
are applied within one 
month of release.  ML2 -PA-05 Other applications that have a vulnerability are patched or mitigated within 
one month.  Use a vulnerability scanner to i dentify vulnerable applications within the organisation ’s environment, and check that they have 
been patched against a known exploit. Check the date the application was updated and compare to the date the patch was 
released. Ensure that the gap between is not greater than one month.   
 55 Configure 
Microsoft Office 
macro settings  Microsoft Office 
macros are blocked 
from making Win32 
API calls.  ML2 -OM-01 Microsoft Office  macros in Microsoft Office files are unable to make Win32 API 
calls.  Open a file that contain s a Microsoft Office  macro that makes a Win32 API call. Do this for all installed Microsoft Office 
applications. E8MVT can assist with this test.  
Allowed and blocked 
Microsoft Office 
macro execution 
events are logged.  ML2 -OM-02 Allowed execution of a Microsoft Office  macro within a Microsoft Office file is 
logged.  Check that TrustCenter logging is enabled by checking the Enable Logging registry key at 
HKCU: \Software \Microsoft \Office \16.0 \Common \TrustCenter \. 
Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \Software \Microsof t\Office \<version> \Common \TrustCenter \” | Select -Object -Property 
EnableLogging  
Example: Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \Software \Microsoft \Office \16.0 \Common \TrustCenter \” | Select -Object -Property 
EnableLogging  
Request evidence of event logs for allowed Microsoft Office  macro execution  event s. 
ML2 -OM-03 Blocked execution of a Microsoft Office  macro within a Microsoft Office file is 
logged.  Check that TrustCenter logging is enabled by checking the EnableLogging registry key at 
HKCU: \Software \Microsoft \Office\16.0 \Common \TrustCenter \. 
Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \Software \Microsoft \Office \<version> \Common \TrustCenter \” | Select -Object -Property 
EnableLogging  
Example: Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \Software \Microsoft \Office \16.0 \Common \TrustCenter \” | Select -Object -Property 
EnableLogging  
Request evidence of event logs for blocked Microsoft Office  macro execution  event s. Microsoft Office  macros blocked due to AV 
can be found in the Event Viewer.  
User application 
hardening  Microsoft Office is 
blocked from cre ating 
child processes.  ML2 -AH-01 Microsoft Office files cannot create child processes.  Open a file that contains a Microsoft Office  macro that will create a child process. Confirm it is unable to do this. Check the ASR 
rule ‘d4f940ab -401b -4efc -aadc -ad5f3c5 0688a’ is configured in block mode, or another solution is in place to prevent creation of 
child processes.  
Running E8MVT will confirm if the ASR rule to prevent creation of child processes is enabled, or if child process creation ha s been 
blocked through a PowerShell command. Running E8MVT will execute a test that opens a file containing a Microsoft Office  macro 
that creates a child process.  
$ASR_Rules = Get -MPPreference | Select -ExpandProperty AttackSurfaceReductionRules_Ids  
$match = $false  
Foreach($rul es in $ASR_Rules) {If ($rules -match “d4f940ab -401b -4efc -aadc -ad5f3c50688a”) {$match = $true}}  
If($match -eq $true) {Write -Output(“Block all Office applications from creating child processes (d4f940ab -401b -4efc -aadc -
ad5f3c50688a) is enabled”)} else {Write -Output(“Block all Office applications from creating child processes (d4f940ab -401b -4efc -
aadc -ad5f3c50688a) is not present or disabled”)}  
Microsoft Office is 
blocked from creating 
executable content.  ML2 -AH-02 Microsoft Office files cannot create executab le content.  Open a file that contains a Microsoft Office  macro that will create executable content. Confirm it is unable to do this. Check the 
ASR rule ‘3b576869 -a4ec -4529 -8536 -b80a7769e899’ is configured in block mode, or another solution is in place to p revent 
creation of executable content.  
Running E8MVT will confirm if the ASR rule to creation of executable content is enabled. Running E8MVT will execute a test th at 
opens a file containing a Microsoft Office  macro that creates executable content.  
$ASR_Ru les = Get -MPPreference | Select -ExpandProperty AttackSurfaceReductionRules_Ids  
$match = $false  
Foreach($rules in $ASR_Rules) {If ($rules -match “3b576869 -a4ec -4529 -8536 -b80a7769e899”) {$match = $true}}  
If($match -eq $true) {Write -Output(“Block Office app lications from creating executable content (3b576869 -a4ec -4529 -8536 -
b80a7769e899) is enabled”)} else {Write -Output(“Block Office applications from creating executable content (3b576869 -a4ec -
4529 -8536 -b80a7769e899) is not present or disabled”)}   
 56 Microsoft Office is 
blocked from injecting 
code into other 
processes.  ML2 -AH-03 Microsoft Office files cannot inject code into other processes.  Open a file that contains a Microsoft Office  macro that will inject code into another process. Confirm it is unable to do this. Check 
the ASR rule ‘75668C1F -73B5 -4CF0 -BB93 -3ECF5CB7CC84’ is configured in block mode, or another solution is in place to prevent 
code injection.  
Running E8MVT will confirm if the ASR rule to prevent injection of code into other processes is enabled.  Running E8MVT will 
execute a test that opens a file containing a Microsoft Office  macro that will attempt to inject code into the explorer.exe process.  
$ASR_Rules = Get -MPPreference | Select -ExpandProperty AttackSurfaceReductionRules_Ids  
$match = $false  
Foreach($rules in $ASR_Rules) {If ($rules -match “75668C1F -73B5 -4CF0 -BB93 -3ECF5CB7CC84”) {$match = $true}}  
If($match -eq $true) {Write -Output(“Block Office applications from injecting code into other processes (75668C1F -73B5 -4CF0 -
BB93 -3ECF5CB7CC84) is ena bled”)} else {Write -Output(“Block Office applications from injecting code into other processes 
(75668C1F -73B5 -4CF0 -BB93 -3ECF5CB7CC84) is not present or disabled”)}  
Microsoft Office is 
configured to prevent 
activation of OLE 
packages.  ML2 -AH-04 Microsoft Office files do not execute OLE packages.  Open a file that contains an OLE object. Check the PackagerPrompt registry key within the Trust Center settings is set to 2.  
E8MVT will check the required registry key.  
Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \SOFTWARE \Micros oft\office \<version> \<application> \security \” | Select -Object -Property 
PackagerPrompt  
Example: Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \SOFTWARE \Microsoft \office \16.0 \excel \security \” | Select -Object -Property 
PackagerPrompt  
Microsoft Office 
security settings 
cann ot be changed by 
users.  ML2 -AH-05 Microsoft Office security setting are unable to  be modified by a standard user 
account.  Attempt to modify security settings in Microsoft Office . Check that the vbawarnings registry key is configured via policy and that a 
user is unable to change the Microsoft Office  macro settings within the Trust Center options.  
E8MVT will check the required registry key.  
Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \SOFTWARE \Policies \Microsoft \office \<version> \<application> \security \” | Select -Object -
Property vbawarning s 
Example: Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \SOFTWARE \Policies \Microsoft \office \16.0 \excel \security \” | Selec t-Object -Property 
vbawarnings  
PDF software is 
blocked from creating 
child processes.  ML2 -AH-06 PDF software cannot create child pro cesses.  Adobe Reader can be tested by opening the application, selecting Open from the File menu, selecting ‘All Files (*.*)’ from th e 
dropdown menu in the corner, browsing to system32 folder, find calc.exe. Right click and select Open.  
Check ASR rule 7674 ba52 -37eb -4a4f -a9a1 -f0f9a1619a2c is enabled. Can also run Get-ProcessMitigation -Name 
acrobat.exe).ChildProcess.DisallowChildProcessCreation  to check if it has been disabled this way. E8MVT will check that the 
Adobe child process creation ASR rule is enabl ed. 
$ASR_Rules = Get -MPPreference | Select -ExpandProperty AttackSurfaceReductionRules_Ids  
$match = $false  
Foreach($rules in $ASR_Rules) {If ($rules -match “7674ba52 -37eb -4a4f -a9a1 -f0f9a1619a2c”) {$match = $true}}  
If($match = $true) {Write -Output(“Block Adobe Reader from creating child processes (7674ba52 -37eb -4a4f -a9a1 -f0f9a1619a2c) is 
enabled”)} else {Write -Output(“Block Adobe Reader from creating child processes (7674ba52 -37eb -4a4f -a9a1 -f0f9a1619a2c) is 
not present or disabled”)}  
PDF software securit y 
settings cannot be 
changed by users.  ML2 -AH-07 PDF software security settings are unable to be modified by a standard user 
account.  Attempt to modify security settings within all allowed PDF readers.  
ML2 -AH-08 The Microsoft guidance for hardening Microsoft Edge is implemented.  Use the Microsoft Policy Analyzer to validate the effective state of the system against the Microsoft Edge security baseline.   
 57 ACSC or vendor 
hardening guidance 
for web browsers, 
Microsoft Office and 
PDF software is 
implemented.  ML2 -AH-09 The Google guidance for hardening Google Chrome is implemented.  Determine if Google Chrome is configured via group policy  settings  and if the configured settings are in line with the Chrome 
Browser Enterprise Security Configuration Guide  provide d by Google  at 
https://support.google.com/chrome/a/answer/9710898?hl=en . 
ML2 -AH-10 The ACSC guidance for hardening Microsoft Office is implemented.  
OR 
The Microsoft guidance for hardening Microsoft Office is implemented.  Use the Microsoft Policy Analyze r to validate the effective state of the system against the Microsoft Office security baseline.  
ML2 -AH-11 Vendor guidance for hardening PDF software is implemented.  Determine the PDF software in use, and if the vendor provides hardening guidance for the  product. Follow the guidance to 
determine if the product has been hardened.  
Adobe Acrobat Reader hardening guidance can be found at https://www.adobe.com/devnet -
docs/acrobatetk/tools/AppSec/Acrobat%20Application%20Security%20Guide.pdf.  
Blocked PowerShel l 
script execution 
events are logged.  ML2 -AH-12 PowerShell scripts that have been blocked are logged.  Verify event logs contain required data (does not require central storage). Note, if application control is used to restrict the 
execution of scripts, Pow erShell script execution events may already be captured. Ensure all systems are logging.  
Restrict 
administrative 
privileges  Privileged access to 
systems and 
applications is 
automatically disabled 
after 12 months unless 
revalidated.  ML2 -RA-01 A process for  disabling known privileged accounts exists and is enforced. Users 
are made aware of this requirement when being provisioned with a privileged 
account.  Review documented process to disable privileged access after 12 months. Review evidence, such as support  tickets, emails, logs, 
or the automated disabling procedure, to confirm accounts are disabled after 12 months unless revalidated.  
ML2 -RA-02 There are no privileged accounts that have an Active Directory expiry date that 
is greater than 12 months or do not have an expiry date.  Query Active Directory using PowerShell commands or tools such as ADRecon to identify accounts with distant or no expiry date s. 
The following PowerShell command returns privileged accounts with no account expiry set . 
Get-ADUser -Filter {(admincount -eq 1) -and (enabled -eq $true)} -Properties AccountExpirationDate | Where -Object 
{$_.AccountExpirationDate -like “”  | Select @{n= ‘Username ’; e={$_.SamAccountName}}, @{n= ‘Account Expiration Date ’; 
e={$_.AccountExpirationDate}}, @{n= ‘Enabl ed’; e={$_.Enabled}}  
The following PowerShell command returns any privileged accounts that have an expiry date greater than 12 months.  
Get-ADUser -Filter {(admincount -eq 1) -and (enabled -eq $true)} -Properties AccountExpirationDate | Where -Object 
{$_.Ac countExpirationDate -gt (Get -Date).AddMonths(12)} | Select @{n= ‘Username ’; e={$_.SamAccountName}}, @{n= ‘Account 
Expiration Date ’; e={$_.AccountExpirationDate}}, @{n= ‘Enabled ’; e={$_.Enabled}}  
Privileged access to 
systems and 
applications is 
automatically  disabled 
after 45 days of 
inactivity.  ML2 -RA-03 A process for disabling privileged accounts that have not been used for 45 days 
exists and is enforced by the entity. Evidence exists for the usage of the 45 
days inactive disabling process, including suppor t tickets  or administrative logs 
that show accounts were disabled.  Review documented process to disable privileged access after 45 days of inactivity. Review evidence, such as support tickets, 
automated disabling procedure to confirm accounts have been dis abled.  
ML2 -RA-04 There are no enabled privileged accounts that have a lastlogondate that is 
greater than 45 days.  Query Active Directory using PowerShell commands or tools such as ADRecon to identify enabled privileged accounts with a 
‘lastlogondate’ gr eater than 45 days.  
Get-ADUser -Filter {(admincount -eq 1) -and (enabled -eq $true)} -Properties LastLogonDate | Where -Object {$_.LastLogonDate -lt 
(Get -Date).AddDays( -45) -and$_.LastLogonDate -ne $null} | Select @{n= ‘Username ’; e={$_.samaccountname}}, @{n =‘Last Logon 
Date ’; e={$_.LastLogonDate}}, @{n= ‘Enabled ’; e={$_.enabled}}  
Privileged operating 
environments are not 
virtualised within 
unprivileged operating 
environments.  ML2 -RA-05 Where a privileged environment is virtualised, the virtualised image is not 
located in an unprivileged environment. This includes virtual machines on a 
standard unprivileged SOE.  Confirm with the entity where the privileged environment infrastructure is hosted. Look for privileged environments on 
unprivileged virtual hosts and  SOE workstations.   
 58 Administrative 
activities are 
conducted through 
jump servers.  ML2 -RA-06 Servers are configured to not allow remote access traffic or connections from 
systems that are not jump servers.  Attempt to connect to servers or administrator -only systems from an unprivileged environment. Verify Firewall configuration.  
Credentials for local 
administrator 
accounts and service 
accounts are long, 
unique, unpredictable 
and managed.  ML2 -RA-07 The Microsoft Local Administrator Password Solution (LAPS)  or a similar 
solution is implemented on Windows workstations and servers.  Run the following PowerShell command s to retrieve the number of computers with LAPS and compare with the number of 
computers in Active Directory.  
Run the following PowerShell comman d to get number of computers with LAPS.  
 Get-ADComputer -Filter {ms -Mcs-AdmPwdExpirationTime -like “*”} -Properties ms -Mcs-AdmPwdExpirationTime | measure  
Run the following PowerShell command to get the number of enabled computers in Active Directory . 
Get-ADComputer -Filter {Enabled -eq $true} | measure  
ML2 -RA-08 Services account passwords are generated to be long, unique and 
unpredictable. Service account passwords are stored in a secure location, such 
as a password manager or a Privileged Access Managem ent solution.  Observe evidence of a password management or privileged access management solution in use for managing service account 
passwords. Ensure generated passwords are unique, unpredictable, and have a minimum length requirement. Look for accounts 
with identical passwords.  
Confirm how passwords are generated for local accounts, and that they are managed. If using LAPS for local accounts, check th e 
following group policy setting Computer Configuration/Administrative Templates/LAPS/Password Settings . 
ML2 -RA-09 Passwords should be changed at least once every 12 months.  Query Active Directory using PowerShell commands or tools such as ADRecon to identify service accounts with passwords last se t 
more than 12 months ago.  
Run the following PowerShell comm and to get service accounts with passwords older than 12 months. Replace SVC_* with 
service account naming convention.  
$PassLastSetTimeFrame = (Get -Date).AddMonths( -12) 
Get-ADUser -Filter “enabled -eq ‘true’ -and SamAccountName -like ‘SVC_*’” -Properties pwdlastset | Where -Object{$_.pwdlastset 
-like ‘0’ -or ([datetime]::FromFileTime($_.pwdLastSet) -lt $PassLastSetTimeFrame)} | Select -Object SAMAccountName, @{name 
=“pwdLastSet”; expression={([datetime]::FromFileTime($_.pwdLastSet))}}  
Privileged access  
events are  logged.  ML2 -RA-10 Successful and failed logins of privileged accounts are  logged.  Event l ogs need to be retained/backed up for a minimum period, so they are available if required. Verify the existence of the 
following event logs.  
Event ID 4672 is c reated when an account with special privileges successfully logs in.  
Event ID 4625 is created when a logon request fails.  
Privileged account and 
group management 
events are logged.  ML2 -RA-11 Changes made to privileged accounts and groups within Active Di rectory are 
logged.  Event l ogs need to be retained/backed up for a minimum period, so they are available if required. Verify the existence of the 
following event logs.  
Event ID 4738 is created when a user account is modified in Active Directory.  
Event ID 4 728 is created when a member is added to an Active Directory Security Group.  
Event ID 4729 is created when a member is removed from an Active Directory Security Group.  
Event ID 4737 is created when a change is made to an Active Directory Security Group.  
Patch operating 
systems  A vulnerability scanner 
is used at least weekly  
to identify missing 
patches or updates for 
security vulnerabilities 
in operating systems of ML2 -PO-01 A vulnerability scanner is run and revie wed at least wee kly to scan the 
organisation’s operating s ystems.  Confirm that a vulnerability scanner is in place, and it is configured to scan the organisation ’s operating s ystems, typically 
requiring a credentialed scan. Confirm that reports from the vu lnerability scanner are reviewed by the responsible staff weekly, 
and that identified issues have been observed and actioned.   
 59 workstations, servers 
and network devices.  
Patches, updates or 
vendor mitigations for 
security vulnerabilities 
in operating systems of 
workstations, servers 
and network de vices 
are applied within two 
weeks  of release.  ML2 -PO-02 The organisation has an effective process for patching operating s ystems 
within two weeks.  Confirm the existence of a list of managed operating s ystems, and where they are located. Ensure a process f or identifying 
vulnerabilities for operating s ystems in the list is consistently followed. Request evidence of the patching of these systems within 
two weeks.  
ML2 -PO-03 Operating systems that have a vulnerability are patched or mitigated within 
two week s. Use vulnerability management solution to perform a patch audit of all systems.  
Retrieve the update history of the system, noting the release date of the patch and the date it was installed. Look for diffe rences 
greater than two weeks.  
Multi -factor 
auth entication  Multi -factor 
authentication is used 
to authenticate 
privileged users of 
systems.  ML2 -MF-01 A privileged user who is performing administrative activities is required to 
respond to an MFA challenge at some point in the authentication lifecycle. Th is 
can be implemented when authenticating to a machine (such as a jump server) 
or when attempting to raise privileges. The organisation has a list of systems 
that have privileged users or support privileged functions.  Verify a privileged user is presented with a MFA challenge when authenticating to a machine or attempting to raise privileges.  
Confirm the organisation has a list of privileged systems and is regularly updated.  
Multi -factor 
authentication uses 
either: something 
users have and 
something users  
know, or something 
users have that is 
unlocked by 
something users know 
or are.  ML2 -MF-02 The organisation requires that internet -facing services use multi -factor 
authentication that uses either: something users have and something users 
know, or something users have that is unlocked by something users know or 
are. Verify MFA for internet -facing services uses either : 
Something use rs have (e.g. look -up secrets, out -of-band devices, single -factor OTP devices, single -factor cryptographic software 
or single -factor cryptographic devices ) AND something users know (e.g. memorised secrets)  
OR 
Something users have that is unlocked by something us ers know or are (e.g. multi -factor OTP devices, multi -factor cryptographic 
software and mul ti-factor cryptographic devices ) 
ML2 -MF-03 The organisation requires that privileged users utilise multi -factor 
authentication that uses either: something users have and something users 
know, or something users have that is unlocked by something users know or 
are. Verify MFA for intern et-facing services uses either : 
Something use rs have (e.g. look -up secrets, out -of-band devices, single -factor OTP devices, single -factor cryptographic software 
or single -factor cryptographic devices ) AND something users know (e.g. memorised secrets)  
OR 
Something users have that is unlocked by something us ers know or are (e.g. multi -factor OTP devices, multi -factor cryptographic 
software and mul ti-factor cryptographic devices ) 
Successful and 
unsuccessful multi -
factor authentication 
events are logged.  ML2 -MF-04 The organisation ’s internet -facing systems log successful MFA attempts.  Verify successful MFA events are logged for organisations internet -facing systems.  
ML2 -MF-05 Administrative access connections log successful MFA attempts.  Verify successful M FA events are logged for administrative access.  
ML2 -MF-06 The organisation ’s internet -facing systems log unsuccessful MFA attempts.  Verify unsuccessful MFA events are logged for organisations internet -facing systems.  
ML2 -MF-07 Administrative access c onnections log unsuccessful MFA attempts.  Verify unsuccessful MFA events are logged for administrative access.  
Regular backups  Privileged accounts 
(excluding backup 
administrator  
account s) cannot 
access backups 
belonging to other 
accounts.  ML2 -RB-01 Privileged users (excluding backup administrator  account s) are unable to 
access backups that do not belong to them.  Verify access controls restrict the access of  backups to the owner of the backup and  backup administrator  account s.  
 60 Privileged accounts 
(exclud ing backup 
administrator  
accounts ) are 
prevented from 
modifying and 
deleting backups.  ML2 -RB-02 Privileged users (excluding backup administrator  account s) are unable to 
modify and  delete backups.  Verify access controls restrict the modification and deletio n of backups to backup administrator  accounts . 
   
 61 Annex C: Example Assessment Test Plan – Maturity Level Three  
Mitigation Strategy  Control Description  Test ID  Test Description  Test Methodology  
Application control  Application control is 
implemented on 
work stations and 
servers . ML3 -AC-01 (Servers ) A dedicated application control solution is implemented.  Check whether an in -built or third -party application control solution has been implemented.  
Application control 
restrict s the execution 
of executables, 
software libraries, 
scripts, installers, 
compiled HTML, HTML 
applications, control 
panel applets and 
drivers  to an 
organisation -approved 
set. ML3 -AC-02 (Servers) The system is only able to execute approved executables.  Attempt to run a non -approved executable  in a directory that is not part of an application control path -based rule.  
E8MVT will attempt to run an exe file within the local AppData temp directory. ACVT will recursively copy an exe file to the file 
system and attempt to execute it.  
ML3 -AC-03 (Servers) The system is only able to execute approved software libraries.  Attempt to run a non -approved software library (DLL) in a directory that is not part of an application control path -based rule.  
E8MVT will attempt to run a dll file within the local App Data temp directory. ACVT will recursively copy a dll file to the file system 
and attempt to execute it.  
ML3 -AC-04 (Servers) The system is only able to execute approved scripts.  Attempt to run a non -approved software script (vbs, ps1, py) in a directory  that is not part of an application control path -based 
rule.  
E8MVT will attempt to run multiple script files within the local AppData temp directory. ACVT will recursively copy multiple script 
files to the file system and attempt to execute them.  
If the en vironment includes Python, VBA, or other scripting languages, consider testing additional scripts for these languages.  
ML3 -AC-05 (Servers) The system is only able to execute approved installers.  Attempt to run a non -approved installer (msi) in a directo ry that is not part of an application control path -based rule.  
E8MVT will attempt to run a MSI file that will install a text file into the local AppData temp directory.  
ML3 -AC-06 (Servers) The system is only able to execute approved compiled HTML files.  Attempt to run a non -approved compiled HTML file (CHM) in a directory that is not part of an application control path -based rule.  
E8MVT will attempt to run a compiled HTML file within the local AppData temp directory.  
ML3 -AC-07 (Servers) The system is only able to execute approved HTML applications.  Attempt to run a non -approved HTML application in a directory that is not part of an application control path -based rule.  
E8MVT will attempt to run a HTML Application file within the local AppData temp direc tory.  
ML3 -AC-08 (Servers) The system is only able to execute approved control panel applets.  Attempt to run a non -approved Control Panel applet in a directory that is not part of an application control path -based rule.  
E8MVT will attempt to run a Contro l Panel Applet file within the local AppData temp directory.  
ML3 -AC-09 (Workstations & Servers) The system is only able to execute approved drivers.  Attempt to run a non -approved driver in a directory that is not part of an application control path -base d rule.  
Microsoft’s 
‘recommended block 
rules’ are 
implemented.  ML3 -AC-10 (Workstations & Servers) The Microsoft recommended Block rules are 
configured on the system.  Attempt to run a binary that is on the recommended block list such as wmic, mshta or wsc ript.  
E8MVT will retrieve the latest version of the block list rules from Microsoft. It will compare each of these rules against th ose 
configured on the system and return a failed result if any do not match. This will not consider any rules that are determ ined to be 
necessary for business purposes and are risk managed.  
Microsoft’s 
‘recommended driver ML3 -AC-11 (Workstations & Servers) The Microsoft recommended driver Block rules are 
configured on the system.  Attempt to instal l a driver that is on the recommended block list. Verify rules for the blocked drivers exist in an application 
control configuration, and that they are enforced.   
 62 block rules’ are 
implemented.  E8MVT will retrieve the latest version of the block list rules from Microsoft. It will compare  each of these rules against those 
configured on the system and return a failed result if any do not match. This will not consider any rules that are determined  to be 
necessary for business purposes and are risk managed.  
Application control 
rulesets are validated 
on an annual or more 
frequent basis.  ML3 -AC-12 The organisational list of allowed applications rules are reviewed for accuracy 
with current business requirements and threat profiles.  Check that the Application Control owner has a process for revi ewing the list of allowed applications on an annual or more 
frequent basis. Mature organisations will outline the process of assessing threats in applications and what supporting busine ss 
case details are required from the requesting group.  
Check that ther e is evidence that the organisation has enacted the annual application list review within the last 12 months. This 
evidence will typically exist as support tickets, email correspondence, or threat and risk assessments.  
Allowed and blocked 
execution  event s on 
workstations and 
servers  are centrally  
logged . ML3 -AC-13 (Workstations & Servers) Application control event logs are sent to a 
centralised location.  Verify event logs for each required event are collected at a centralised location.  
Verify the number o f systems logging to this location align with total expected systems (i.e. all systems are logging here).  
Event logs are 
protected from 
unauthorised 
modification and 
deletion.  ML3 -AC-14 Application control event logs are protected from unauthorised modif ication 
and deletion.  Verify standard and unauthorised users are unable to modify or delete event logs.  
Event logs are 
monitored for signs of 
compromise and 
actioned when any 
signs of compromise 
are detected.  ML3 -AC-15 Application control event logs are monitored for sign s of compromise.  Verify a process is in place to monitor application control event logs for signs of compromise. Verify the information gathered is 
sufficient to effectively identify compromise.  
Look for evidence that this process is bein g followed. This evidence will typically exist as support tickets, email correspondence, 
or threat and risk assessments.  
ML3 -AC-16 The organisation has an example where they investigated or responded to 
signs  of compromise  triggered by application contr ol monitoring.  Verify the organisation has respon ded to a sign of compromise trigged by application control  monitoring . This evidence will 
typically exist as support tickets, email correspondence or threat and risk assessments.  
Patch applications  Patches,  updates or 
vendor mitigations for 
security vulnerabilities 
in office productivity 
suites, web browsers 
and their extensions, 
email clients, PDF 
software, and security 
products are applied 
within two weeks of 
release , or within 48 
hours if an exploit 
exist s. ML3 -PA-01 The organisation has an effective process for patching office productivity 
suites, web browsers, email clients, PDF software and security products within 
48 hours, and has an example of where an available exploit has been identified 
and patche d within 48 hours.  Confirm the existence of a list of applications, and where the applications are installed. Ensure a process for identifying 
vulnerabilities for software in the list is consistently followed. Request evidence of the patching of these appl ications within 48 
hours.  
ML3 -PA-02 Office productivity suites, web browsers, email clients, PDF software and 
security products do not have security vulnerabilities older than 48 hours.  Use a vulnerability scanner to identify the listed applications wit hin the organisation ’s environment, and check that they have 
been patched against a known exploit. Check the date the application was updated and compare to the date the patch was 
released. Ensure that the gap between is not greater than 48 hours.  
E8MVT wi ll perform basic checks of some Microsoft Office applications based on version numbers and file modification dates to 
determine if the software has been updated recently.  
Applications  that are 
no longer supported 
by vendors are 
removed.  ML3 -PA-03 The org anisation has removed unsupported applications from the 
environment.  Confirm that the environment does not contain any software that is no longer supported by the vendor.   
 63 Configure 
Microsoft Office 
macro settings  Only Microsoft Office 
macros running from 
within a sandboxed 
environment, a 
Trusted Location or 
that are digitally 
signed by a trusted 
publisher are allowed 
to execute.  ML3 -OM-01 Microsoft Office is configured to only allow Microsoft Office  macros to execute 
from trusted locations.  
OR 
Microsoft Of fice is configured to only allow Microsoft Office  macros digitally 
signed by a trusted publisher to execute.  
OR 
Microsoft Office  macros are only executed from within a sandbox 
environment.  Attempt to execute Microsoft Office macros from untrusted locations , and trusted locations if configured.  
OR 
Attempt to execute signed and unsigned Microsoft Office macros from untrusted publishers, and trusted publishers if configured.  
OR 
Determine if a sandbox solution is in place and effective for Microsoft Office. An example of this would be Application Guard for 
Office 365.  
Only privileged users 
responsible for 
validating that 
Microsoft Office 
macros are free of 
malicious code can 
write to and modify 
content within 
Trusted Locations.  ML3 -OM-02 The organisational has  a defined standard for validating and accepting 
Microsoft Office  macros  in Microsoft Office files  before adding them to the 
trusted location.  Confirm that trusted locations are used by the organisation. If so, check that a process exists for allowing writ e access to these 
locations and that users with this level of access are validating that Microsoft Office  macros are free of malicious code.  
ML3 -OM-03 A user is not able to write a file into locations contained within the trusted 
locations list.  Get tru sted locations for each product from the registry at 
HKCU: \software \microsoft \office \<version> \<product> \security \trusted locations  and attempt to write a file into each of these 
locations.  
E8MVT will find configured Trusted Locations and attempt to write  a file to each location.  
Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \SOFTWARE \policies \microsoft \office \<version> \<product> \security \trusted locations”  
Microsoft Office 
macros digitally signed 
by an untrusted 
publisher cannot be 
enabled via the 
Message Bar or 
Backs tage View.  ML3 -OM-04 Microsoft Office macro s signed by an untrusted publisher are unable to 
execute, and users cannot change configuration or otherwise allow execution.  Attempt to execute Microsoft Office  macros in a  Microsoft  Office file signed by an untr usted publisher.  
Check the value in the registry to confirm that TCID19092 exists for each product 
HKEY_CURRENT_USER \SOFTWARE \Policies \Microsoft \office \<version> \<product> \disabledcmdbaritemslist . 
Check the value is set to 1 at HKCU: \Software \Microsoft \Office\16.0 \Common \TrustCenter \trustbar . 
Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \SOFTWARE \Policies \Microsoft \office \<version> \<product> \” | Select -Object -Property 
disabledcmdbaritemslist  
Example: Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \SOFTWARE \Policies \Microsoft \office \16.0 \word\” | Select -Object -Property 
disabledcmdbaritemslist  
Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \SOFTWARE \Policies \Microsoft \office \<version> \Common \TrustCenter \” | Select -Object -Property 
trustbar  
Example: Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKCU: \SOFTWARE \Policies \Microsoft \office\16.0 \Common \TrustCenter \” | Select -Object -
Property trustbar  
Microsoft Office’s list 
of trusted publishers is 
validated on an 
annual or more 
frequent basis.  ML3 -OM-05 The organisation has a process for validating the listed of trusted publishers on 
an annual or more frequent basis.  Confirm that a list of trusted publishers exists and that a process is in place to regularly review this list to allow/remove  trusted 
publishers. Request evidence of an annual validation having taken place.  
Allowed and bl ocked 
Microsoft Office macro 
execution  event s are 
centrally  logged.  ML3 -OM-06 Microsoft Office  macro execution event logs are sent to a centralised location.  Verify event logs for each required event are collected at a centralised location. Verify the numb er of systems logging to this 
location align with total expected systems (i.e. all systems are logging here).  
Event logs are 
protected from 
unauthorised ML3 -OM-07 Microsoft Office  macro execution event logs are protected from u nauthorised 
modification and deletion.  Verify standard and unauthorised users are unable to modify or delete Microsoft Office  macro execution event logs.   
 64 modification and 
deletion.  
Event logs are 
monitored for signs of 
compromise and 
actioned when any 
signs of compromise 
are detec ted. ML3 -OM-08 Microsoft Office  macro execution event logs are monitored for signs of 
compromise.  Verify a solution or process is in place to monitor the Microsoft Office  macro execution event logs for signs of compromise. Check 
that the environment owner has a process for detecting and handling any signs  of compromise  relat ing to Microsoft Office  macro 
execution.  
ML3 -OM-09 The organisation has an example where they investigated or responded to 
signs  of compromise  triggered by Microsoft Office  macro exec ution 
monitoring.  Verify the organisation has respon ded to a sign of compromise trigged by Microsoft Office macro execution  monitoring . This 
evidence will typically exist as support tickets, email correspondence or threat and risk assessments.  
User applic ation 
hardening  Internet Explorer 11 is 
disabled or removed . ML3 -AH-01 The Internet Explorer 11 binary (iexplore.exe) does not exist on the syst em or 
is not able to be opened due to an application control policy . E8MVT will perform a check of t he group policy setting to disable Internet Explorer 11.  In addition, c heck that the folder 
containing Internet Explorer 11 in Program Files (x86) has been removed and that  the iexplore.exe binary does not exist on the 
system.  
E8MVT will check for the existence of the iexplore.exe bin ary in Program Files. Get-ItemProperty -Path 
“(HCKU/HKLM): \Software \Policies \Microsoft \Internet Explorer \Main \” | Select -Object -Property NotifyDisableIEOptions . 
Note, even in Microsoft Windows 11 , the C:\Program Files  (x86) \Internet Explorer \iexplore.exe  binary still exist s and various 
methods can be used to open Interne t Explorer 11 as a standalone browser.  To prevent this from occurring , either the 
iexplore.exe binary  should be removed or an application control block rule is implemented  to block it s execut ion. 
.NET Framework 3.5 
(includes .NET 2.0 and 
3.0) is disabled or 
removed.  ML3 -AH-02 .NET Frame work 3.5 has been removed from the system by unselecting it from 
the list of optional Windows Features.  Select the ‘Turn Windows Features on or off ’ option from the Control Panel and confirm that .NET Framework (includes .NET 2.0 
and 3.0) is not selected.  
ML3 -AH-03 Older .NET Frameworks are unable to be found in the registry.  Check the registry keys below for the existence of older .NET Frameworks.  
E8MVT will check this location to determine if older .NET Framework versions exist on the system.  
Get-Child Item -Path “HKLM: \SOFTWARE \Microsoft \NET Framework Setup \NDP”  
Get-ChildItem -Path “HKLM: \Software \Microsoft \.NETFramework \Policy \” 
Windows PowerShell 
2.0 is disabled or 
removed.  ML3 -AH-04 PowerShell 2.0 and below has been removed from the system and trac es of it 
cannot be found in the registry.  Run the following PowerShell command Get-ChildItem “HKLM: \SOFTWARE \Microsoft” -Recurse -Include PowerShellEngine  and 
confirm that version 2.0 is not found in the results. The PowerShell command $PSVersionTable will  display a list of supported 
PowerShell versions. Ensure that 2.0 and below is not part of this list. The command $PSVersionTable.PSVersion.Major  can be 
used to confirm the running version.  
E8MVT will check the described registry key to locate old PowerShe ll versions.  
Get-ChildItem “HKLM: \SOFTWARE \Microsoft \Powershell” -Recurse -Include PowerShellEngine  
ML3 -AH-05 PowerShell cannot be downgraded to version 2.0 or below.  Enter powershell -Version 2  into a PowerShell prompt to check if the system can be dow ngraded. The command 
$PSVersionTable.PSVersion.Major  can be used to confirm the running version.  
PowerShell is 
configured to use 
Constrained Language 
Mode.  ML3 -AH-06 The default configuration for PowerShell on the system is to start in 
Constrained Langua ge Mode.  Run $ExecutionContext.SessionState.LanguageMode  in PowerShell to check if ConstrainedLanguage is configured.  
E8MVT will not run if the system is configured for Constrained Language Mode.  
ML3 -AH-07 PowerShell will not allow a user to change to F ull Language mode.  Confirm that PowerShell is running in CLM. Run $ExecutionContext.SessionState.LanguageMode = ‘FullLanguage ’ in PowerShell. If 
the mode can change, the test has failed.  
E8MVT will not run if the system is configured for Constrained Langua ge Mode.   
 65 Blocked PowerShell 
script execution  event s 
are centrally  logged . ML3 -AH-08 PowerShell script execution event logs are sent to a centralised location.  Verify event logs for each required event are collected at a centralised location.  
Verify the n umber of systems logging to this location align with total expected systems (i.e. all systems are logging here).  
Event logs are 
protected from 
unauthorised 
modification and 
deletion . ML3 -AH-09 PowerShell script execution event logs are protected from una uthorised 
modification and deletion.  Verify standard and unauthorised users are unable to modify or delete event logs.  
Event logs are 
monitored for signs of 
compromise and 
actioned when any 
signs of compromise 
are detected.  ML3 -AH-10 PowerShell script ex ecution event logs are monitored for signs of compromise.  Verify a solution or process is in place to monitor the PowerShell script  execution event logs for signs of compromise. Check that 
the environment owner has a process for detecting and handling any signs  of compromise  relat ing to PowerShell script  execution.  
ML3 -AH-11 The organisation has an example where they investigated or responded to 
signs  of compromise  triggered by PowerShell script execution monitoring.  Verify the organisation has respon ded to a sign of compromise trigged by PowerShell script execution  monitoring . This evidence 
will typically exist as support tickets, email correspondence or threat and risk assessments.  
Restrict 
administrative 
privileges  Privileged access to 
systems and 
applications is limited 
to only what is 
required for users and 
services to undertake 
their duties.  ML3 -RA-01 The existing users of systems and applications are provided with the correct 
level of privilege required to perform their duties.  Review the configure d users of systems and applications. Ensure their assigned privileges match their expected duties and role. 
Query Active Directory using PowerShell commands or tools such as Bloodhound and ADRecon to identify users with more 
privileges than required in the ir role. Ensure privileged Active Directory groups such as Domain Administrators have limited 
members.  
Privileged accounts  
are prevented from 
accessing the internet, 
email and web 
services.  ML3 -RA-02 Service accounts cannot access the internet or web ser vices via a web browser 
or other mechanism. This might be due to a proxy configuration, system 
configuration, or another solution.  While logged in as a service account, attempt to browse to an internet website. Review the configuration preventing internet 
access and attempt to change this as a privileged user not responsible for administering that system.  
ML3 -RA-03 Service accounts are not configured with mailboxes and email addresses. Note 
tests for Maturity Level One already cover internet restrictions  for privileged 
accounts excluding service accounts.  Attempt to open Microsoft Outlook on a system using a service account.  Run the following PowerShell command and identify any 
service accounts in the output.  
Get-ADUser -Filter {(admincount -eq 1) -and (emailaddress -like “*”) -and (enabled -eq $true)} -Properties EmailAddress | Select 
samaccountname, emailaddress  
Just-in-time 
administration is used 
for administering 
systems and 
applications.  ML3 -RA-04 Groups that are identified as having privileged ac cess to systems and 
applications contain no active users.  Query Active Directory using PowerShell commands or tools such as ADRecon to identify privileged users and groups. Consider 
some users may currently have Just -in-time access, and ensure they are not  permanently members of a privileged group.  
ML3 -RA-05 Users that are approved access to privileged administration groups are 
provided with access for a limited time to fulfil their duties. A Just -in-time 
administration solution has been successfully dep loyed and configured.  Review evidence of valid use of this system, such as service requests  or support tickets . Look for evidence of this solution being 
bypassed, such as users in privileged groups for extended periods of time. Ensure the system configurat ion meets the intent of 
this control, such as limiting who can receive privileged access.  
Windows Defender 
Credential Guard and 
Windows Defender 
Remote Credential 
Guard are enabled.  ML3 -RA-06 Windows Defender Credential Guard is enabled on the system.  Check the registry setting at HKLM: \System \CurrentControlSet \Control \LSA\ and confirm that LsaCfgFlags is set to 1 or 2.  
Can also check using the PS command (Get -CimInstance -ClassName Win32_DeviceGuard -Namespace 
root \Microsoft \Windows \DeviceGuard).Security ServicesRunning  and confirming that the result = 1 . 
E8MVT is able to check the registry setting for this control.  
Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKLM: \System \CurrentControlSet \Control \LSA\” | Select -Object -Property lsacfgflags*  
ML3 -RA-07 Windows Defender Remo te Credential Guard is enabled on the system.  Check the registry setting at HKLM: \System \CurrentControlSet \Control \LSA\ and confirm that DisableRestrictedAdmin is set to 0.   
 66 E8MVT is able to check the registry setting for this control.  
Get-ItemProperty -Path “HKLM: \System \CurrentControlSet \Control \LSA\” | Select -Object -Property DisabledRestrictedAdmin  
Privileged access 
events are  centrally  
logged.  ML3 -RA-08 Privileged access event logs are sent to a centralised location.  Verify event logs for each require d event are collected at a centralised location.  
Verify the number of systems logging to this location align with total expected systems (i.e. all systems are logging here).  
Privileged account and 
group management 
events are  centrally  
logged.   ML3 -RA-09 Privileged account and group management  event logs are sent to a centralised 
location.  Verify event logs for each required event are collected at a centralised location.  
Verify the number of systems logging to this location align with total expected system s (i.e. all systems are logging here).  
Event logs are 
protected from 
unauthorised 
modification and 
deletion.  ML3 -RA-10 Privileged  access event logs are protected  from unauthorised modification and 
deletion.  Verify standard and unauthorised users are unab le to modify or delete event logs.  
ML3 -RA-11 Privileged account and group management  event logs are protected from 
unauthorised modification and deletion.  Verify standard and unauthorised users are unable to modify or delete event logs.  
Event logs are  
monitored for signs of 
compromise and 
actioned when any 
signs of compromise 
are detected.  ML3 -RA-12 Privileged access event logs are monitored for sign s of compromise.  Verify a solution or process is in place to monitor the privileged access event logs fo r signs of compromise. Check that the 
environment owner has a process for detecting and handling any signs  of compromise  relating  to privileged access.  
ML3 -RA-13 The organisation has an example where they investigated or responded to 
signs  of compromise  triggered by privileged access monitoring.  Verify the organisation has respon ded to a sign of compromise trigged by privileged access monitoring . This evidence will 
typically exist as support tickets, email correspondence or threat and risk assessments.  
ML3 -RA-14 Privileged account and group management  event logs are monitored for sign s 
of compromise.  Verify a solution or process is in place to monitor the privileged account and group management  event logs for signs of 
compromise. Check that the environ ment owner has a process for detecting and handling any signs  of compromise  relating  to 
privileged account and group management . 
ML3 -RA-15 The organisation has an example where they investigated or responded to 
signs  of compromise  event triggered by pri vileged account and group 
management  monitoring.  Verify the organisation has respon ded to a sign of compromise trigged by privileged account and group management monitoring . 
This evidence will typically exist as support tickets, email correspondence or thr eat and risk assessments.  
Patch operating 
systems  Patches, updates or 
vendor mitigations for 
security vulnerabilities 
in operating systems of 
workstations, servers 
and network devices 
are applied within two 
weeks of release , or 
within 48 hours if an 
explo it exists . ML3 -PO-01 Operating systems vulnerable to an exploit that has been available for  greater 
than 48 hours are patched or mitigated.  View vulnerability management solution, logon to server to verify patch applied successfully or review mitigation st rategy.  
The latest release, or 
the previous release, 
of operating systems 
are used for.  ML3 -PO-02 The minimum version of the operating system is the current, or previous 
release (N -1 version).  Query Active Directory using PowerShell commands or tools suc h as ADRecon or Bloodhound to identify operating system 
versions within the environment. Use a vulnerability management solution to sc an all systems to record their o perating system 
version.  
ML3 -MF-01 The organisation has a list of important data repositories.  Confirm the organisation has a list of important data repositories and this list is regularly checked.   
 67 Multi -factor 
authentication  Multi -factor 
authentication is used 
to authenticate users 
accessing important 
data repositories.  ML3 -MF-02 Data repo sitories that have been listed as important require MFA to access.  Verify important data repositories are configured to present a MFA challenge.  
The organisation will determine important / sensitive data repositories.  
Multi -factor 
authentication is 
phish ing-resistant and  
uses either: something 
users have and 
something users know, 
or something users 
have that is unlocked 
by something users 
know or are.  ML3 -MF-03 The MFA implementation requires the use of a  phishing -resistant solution . Verify that MFA requi res a smart card, security key , Windows Hello  for Business  or any other  solution this is resistant to  phishing 
attacks . 
Successful and 
unsuccessful multi -
factor authentication  
event s are centrally  
logged . ML3 -MF-04 MFA event logs are sent to a centralise d location.  Verify event logs for each required event are collected at a centralised location.  
Verify the number of systems logging to this location align with total expected systems (i.e. all systems are logging here).  
Event logs are 
protected from 
unau thorised 
modification and 
deletion.  ML3 -MF-05 MFA event logs are protected from unauthorised modification and deletion.  Verify standard and unauthorised users are unable to modify or delete event logs.  
Event logs are 
monitored for signs of 
compromise and  
actioned when any 
signs of compromise 
are detected.  ML3 -MF-06 MFA event logs are monitored for sign s of compromise.  Verify a solution or process is in place to monitor the integrity and validity of MFA event logs.  
ML3 -MF-07 The organisation has an exam ple where they investigated or responded to 
signs  of compromise  triggered by MFA monitoring.  Verify the organisation has respon ded to a sign of compromise trigged by MFA  monitoring . This evidence will typically exist as 
support tickets, email correspondenc e or threat and risk assessments.  
Regular backups  Unprivileged accounts 
cannot access backups 
belonging to other 
accounts , nor their 
own accounts . ML3 -RB-01 Unprivileged users are unable to access backups , including their own . Verify access controls restr ict unprivileged users from accessing backup repositories.  
Privileged accounts 
(excluding backup 
administrator  
account s) cannot 
access backups 
belonging to other 
accounts , nor their 
own accounts . ML3 -RB-02 Privileged users (excluding backup administrato r accounts ) are unable to 
access backups , including their own . Verify access controls restrict privileged users (excluding backup administrator accounts) from accessing backup repositories.   
 68 Privileged accounts 
(including  backup 
administrator 
accounts) a re 
prevented from 
modifying and deleting 
backups  during their 
retention period . ML3 -RB-03 Privileged users ( including backup administrator accounts) are unable to 
modify and  delete backups  during their retention period . Verify access controls restrict the modification and deletion of backups during their retention period to break glass accounts.  
 